	Two To The Fifth

	Xanth Book 32

	By Piers Anthony





	Chapter 1: Cyrus


	"Get 	the lead out of your ass."

	Cyrus 	jumped, almost falling off his donkey. "Who said that?"

	"Get 	thee to a nunnery."

	This 	time he placed the source. "You're talking!" he said to 	the donkey.

	"Who 	said that?" the animal said. "You're talking."

	"You're 	repeating whatever you have heard most recently," Cyrus said, 	catching on. "That voice unit was supposed to be for braying. 	How can you speak words?"

	"Defective 	workmanship," the donkey said. "You installed the wrong 	unit."

	Cyrus 	sighed. So using lead instead of iron wasn't his only error when he 	constructed the donkey. When the mechanical animal was too heavy lo 	function effectively, Cyrus's father Roland had given him blunt 	advice: remove the lead. So he had done so, and had a robot animal 	he could ride.

	"Who 	said the other?" he asked, "About the nunnery. That's like 	a monastery, isn't it?"

	"Your 	barbarian mother said it," the donkey 	answered. "You weren't paying attention. She was not referring 	to nuns."

	"Not?"

	"Not. 	According to my defective data bank, it's old Mundanian slang for a 	house of ill repute."

	"What 	is that? I never heard of an ill house."

	"Naturally 	you wouldn't know. You were created halfway innocent, for some 	obscure reason. But she thought it would make a man of you."

	"I'm 	not a man," Cyrus protested. "I'm a cyborg. Half robot, 	half human. I will never be fully human."

	"That's 	what comes of getting yourself delivered to a humanoid robot and a 	barbarian. If you wanted to be normal you should have selected a 	normal couple for parents."

	"I 	didn't have a choice, you nutty and bolty contraption. They signaled 	the stork, not me."

	"Neither 	did I have a choice, half-breed."

	"Had 	you had one, you should have chosen a more competent builder," 	Cyrus said with a halfway metallic smile.

	"Indubitably, 	But since I'm stuck with you, how about giving me a name?"

	"You're 	an ass. An equine breed. So suppose I call you—"

	"Forget 	it, cogbrain!"

	Cyrus 	reconsidered. "Donkey won't do?"

	"Let's 	abbreviate it. Don will do."

	"Don 	Donkey, Not phenomenally original."

	"Neither 	are you, cyborg."

	"It 	will do," Cyrus agreed with resignation.

	He 	rode on, careful not to remark on the animal's jerky gait, lest he 	get another sour reminder of his clumsiness in assembling it. The 	varied terrain of the Land of Xanth passed, becoming less familiar 	as they got farther away from home. They were following one of the 	enchanted paths, so there was no danger.

	Cyrus 	got thirsty, so fished a can of tsoda pop from a saddlebag. He was 	about to open it when it slipped out of his hand, fell to the 	ground, and rolled off the enchanted path. "Bleep," he 	said. Because he had been assembled adult, he was able to use that 	term. It signaled spot disaffection with the situation.

	There 	was a golden streak. Something zipped after the can, caught it in 	its mouth, and brought it back, holding it up. It was a dog made 	from pure gold.

	"Thank 	you." Cyrus said, accepting the can. The dog zipped away again. 	"I wonder what kind of creature that was?"

	"A 	golden retriever, dummy," Don said. "Check your memory 	bank ."

	The 	donkey was right: the information was there. Cyrus simply hadn't 	made the connection. "Thank you." he said again.

	"I'm 	low on fuel." Don complained.

	Cyrus 	considered. Chances of getting where they were going today were 	small, so there was no point in pushing it. "We'll stop at the 	next grazing area we see," he said.

	"We'd 	better."

	They 	came to a small glade strewn with sticks and tufts of old dry grass. 	"And this is it," Cyrus said, dismounting.

	They 	stepped off the path. Don put his head down and picked up a stick 	with his mouth. He chewed, and the stick broke in two. He swallowed 	the pieces.

	"Oh 	what a cute little horse!" a voice exclaimed. It was a rather 	young pretty girl, in fact almost nymphlike, but clothed. She had 	flouncing bark brown hair and sky blue eyes.

	Don 	lifted his head to view her. "I'm not a horse," he said 	sourly. "I'm an ass.' '

	She 	looked bemused. "A what?"

	"A 	donkey," Cyrus said quickly, realizing that the Adult 	Conspiracy prevented her from knowing the other term. "A robot 	donkey. Call him Don."

	"Hello, 	Don," she said shyly. "I'm Piper Nymph."

	"I 	don't see a pipe," Don said.

	"I 	don't have a pipe. It's my name. My parents are Hiatus Human and 	Desiree Dryad. They named me."

	Cyrus's 	data bank oriented. He knew of them; Hiatus was the son of the late 	Zombie Master, with the talent of growing things like ears on walls. 	He had fallen in love with a tree nymph, a hamadryad, and finally 	married her after a seemingly hopeless quest. Cyrus was Jealous; he 	had no romantic prospects at all. At any rate, that explained 	Piper's nymphlike appearance: she was half nymph.

	"What 	good are you?" Don asked.

	"He's 	an ass—I mean donkey," Cyrus said quickly. "He has 	barnyard manners. Ignore him."

	"No, 	I'll answer," 	Piper said. "My talent is healing. That can be very useful. In 	fact I have a pet whirlwind I healed. Dusty."

	"A 	useful whirlwind?" Don asked, his voice fairly rusting with 	sarcasm.

	"Sure. 	I'll show you. What do you most need'.'"

	"More 	dry wood. It's my fuel. I'm a wood-burning robot 	ass." Don obviously thought he had 	stifled her positive attitude.

	Piper 	put two fingers to her mouth and made an ungirl-like whistle. In a 	moment a whirling cloud of dust cruised in toward them, tossing 	leaves and small twigs about. "This is Dusty," she said as 	the whirlwind hovered beside her. "Dusty Dust Devil."

	"What 	an ill wind," Don said.

	The 	wind coalesced into a small homed creature. "Why thank you, 	asinine junk," the little devil said.

	Don 	took it in stride. "Can you bring me dry wood, you homy 	midget?"

	"Please," 	Piper said. "I've got a feeling there's a bad word there."

	The 	devil disappeared, becoming the dust devil. It whirled all around 	the glade and into the surrounding forest. In a moment it retumed, 	filled with brush, and faded. A pile of dead branches fell to the 	ground as the devil formed.

	Don 	stared. "That will hold me for three days!" He started 	chomping wood.

	"Say 	thank you," Cyms murmured to the donkey.

	"Why?" 	Don asked around a mouthful.

	Cyras 	realized that politeness was not part of the animal's program. So he 	gave a reason that would make sense to a selfish creature. "Because 	you want to encourage him to do it again some time, after you mn out 	of fuel."

	Don 	cocked an ear. understanding. "Thank you. Dusty."

	The 	little devil blushed blue.

	"Say 	you're welcome," Piper murmured.

	"You're 	welcome."

	Don 	paused in midchomp. He was coming to appreciate the possible 	benefits of common courtesy.

	Piper 	smiled. She was pretty when she did that. "It's nice to see 	folk get along," she said.

	Too 	bad she was only thirteen years old, according to Cyms's data bank: 	too young to be a prospect for romance. Not that Cyms knew anything 	about romance.

	They 	had to wait while the donkey took in the pile of wood. "What 	are you doing here?" Cyras asked the nymph.

	"I'm 	just widening my horizons," she said. "Every year mother 	lets me wander farther from the tree. By the time I'm adult, I 	should be familiar with the whole area. Already today I met a man 	with the talent of selective friction: he can move anywhere, because 	if he's on slippery ice, he can make one foot have a lot of 	friction, and push with it. then change to the other foot."

	"So 	what good is that?" Don asked. "There's no ice here."

	"Maybe 	some day there'll be ice." Piper said. "Or something else 	that's slippery or soupy."

	"What 	do you want to do when you are adult?" Cyrus asked, partly to 	stop the donkey from being obnoxious. But also because he did not 	know what he wanted to do. and perhaps she would give him an idea.

	"I'd 	like to be an actress. I think," she said. "To be in a 	play and have people watch me and applaud. I wouldn't even have to 	be famous. I'd just like to be on stage."

	That 	seemed like a curious ambition, but Cyrus's caution-circuit 	prevented him from saying so. "I hope you find your play.''

	"I 	hope so too." Piper looked around. "I'd better get home; 	mother worries when I'm out alone too long. She's afraid I'll run 	afoul of some strange man or something."

	Like 	a cyborg? That. too. was worth not saying. "Tell her you met a 	robot donkey with asinine manners."

	"I 	will," she said. "Come on. Dusty, I'll race you to the 	tree."

	The 	little devil became the whirlwind. Dust devil and girl took off into 	the forest, racing each other.

	Meanwhile 	Don had finished the pile of wood. His belly was full; it would, as 	he said, bum for three days, keeping him hot and active.

	They 	wended their way back to the enchanted path. "You know, I'd be 	able to eat faster and last longer if you'd designed me to bum 	coal," Don said.

	"Coal 	has to be mined. Wood's easier to get. Anyway, I had to use parts of 	wrecked robots, and they were all wood-burning."

	"That 	also explains where you got my warped brain chip."

	It 	did indeed. Cyrus was beginning to regret raiding that old 	battleground. But there hadn't seemed to be much altemative if he 	wanted to ride.

	As 	the day waned they came to a camping area. There were pie trees 	galore, and a nice caterpillar tent.

	As 	they approached the tent, a young woman emerged. She looked lean and 	aggressive. Could she be barbarian?

	"Who 	the bleep are you?" she demanded. "This tent is mine; I 	got here first. Go away."

	Cyrus 	sifted through his data banks. "Enchanted Path Camping Sites 	are open to all legitimate travelers," he said. "We are 	legitimate."

	"What, 	you and that dumb ass?"

	"I'm 	an ass, but I'm not dumb," Don said. "I'm a smart ass. How 	smart is your ass, wench?" He eyed her posterior.

	The 	woman stared, evidently taken aback, or at least paused in place. 	"You talk!"

	"Let's 	exchange introductions," Cyrus said hastily. "I am Cyrus 	Cyborg, and this is Don, a robot donkey."

	"He's 	got a bleeping potty mouth on him."

	"Look 	who's talking, you bleeping tart."

	Cyrus 	interposed again. "And you are?"

	'Tess." 	she said aggressively. "Tess Tosterone. I have a problem."

	Don 	opened his mouth, Cyrus hastily stuffed a scrounged piece of wood 	into it. "May we inquire what it is?"

	"I'm 	too pushy. They tell me I need -S Trojan to fix it. But I don't know 	who or where or what he is, so I'm irritable."

	Cyrus's 	data bank sifted again, "Trojan is one name of the Night 	Stallion who runs the dream realm. The horse of a different color. 	But he doesn't have a first name ."

	"Then 	it must be someone else. What would I want with a horse? Your 	talking mule is bad enough. Now are you going to clear out of here 	and let me be?"

	Don 	had chewed and swallowed the stick. "Listen, harridan—"

	Cyrus 	made another effort to settle things politely, though her attitude 	was both annoying and intriguing. "We feel we have equal rights 	to camp here, so we won't be moving on tonight. Why do you object to 	sharing?"

	"Because 	you're a man," Tess said bluntly. "All you men want only 	one thing."

	This 	interested him. "What is that?"

	"Don't 	pretend you don't know, you jerk!"

	"I'm 	not pretending. I don't know. 	That's why I'm traveling to see the Good Magician. I hope he will 	tell me what I truly want."

	Tess 	gazed at him, taking stock. "You're serious."

	"I 	am a serious person, yes."

	"And 	a cyborg."

	"Yes."

	"What's 	a cyborg?"

	"I 	am a robot-human crossbreed, part alive, part machine. I am not sure 	in which category I best belong."

	She 	studied him. "You look completely human."

	"Yes, 	I am crafted to be, externally. But my bones are iron, and I have a 	memory bank and consciousness chip in my iron skull. I am programmed 	to have a human outlook. My parents assembled me carefully."

	"Actually, 	you're one handsome male specimen, with a perfect roughhewn face, 	fairly wild hair, and nice muscles."

	"My 	mother is a barbarian. She likes that type."

	"She 	has good taste in men. Your appearance is appealing to women."

	"It 	is? I did not know."

	"And 	you really don't know what all men want."

	"True. 	The information may be in my data bank, but I need a more specific 	description to evoke it. If you know, I would appreciate it if you 	would tell me. It might save me a year's service with the Good 	Magician."

	Tess 	laughed, surprising him. "It might indeed. Very well, I will 	share the tent with you, and maybe by morning you will figure it out 	for yourself."

	"I 	doubt it. I'm sure it would be simpler if you just told me."

	"Simpler, 	yes. More fun, no."

	Was 	she teasing him? Teasing was another human thing Cyrus did not 	properiy understand. There were a number of things like that, that 	it seemed only experience and new information could clarify. At any 	rate, Tess seemed to have mellowed, so he didn't question it. Maybe 	she would tell him in the morning.

	"I'll 	fetch something to eat," Cyrus said. "Maybe some of those 	lichens."

	"Don't," 	 she said. "Those aren't like-ens, they're dislike-ens. 	 Eat one, and you'll be unfriendly until you find and eat a 	like-en to cancel it, I found out the hard way,"

	He 	might have guessed. "Thank you."

	"The 	effect wears off eventually. But why complicate things?"

	They 	foraged for pies and had a nice dinner while Don snoozed beside the 	pond. Tess was companionable, now that she had accepted him as 	legitimate, but she seemed privately amused about something. Cyrus 	suppressed his annoyance.

	As 	night closed, Tess took charge, in the aggressive way she had. 	"There are two bunks in the tent. You take the left one. I'll 	take the right one. We'll wash up first."

	"As 	you wish," he agreed.

	"Not 	as you wish?"

	"I 	am amenable to whatever normal procedure is. I admit to having had 	little experience. It is my first journey away from home."

	"What, 	away from your mommy?"

	There 	was something in her tone, but it seemed a fair question. "Yes, 	Hannah Barbarian."

	"Just 	how old are you, cyborg?"

	"As 	much as two years."

	"Two 	years! You look grown!"

	"I 	am grown. 	I was delivered as a grown-man kit, in 	a small cat-shaped box, with some assembly 	required. I understand that effort drove both my parents to 	distraction, but in the course of the following year they managed to 	assemble me, and here I am."

	She 	gazed at him assessingly. "So are you grown, or a baby? Are you 	familiar with the Adult Conspiracy?"

	"Yes, 	of course. It is in my data bank. It concerns the things that 	children must be shielded from, such as bad words and stork 	summoning. Naturally I honor it to the letter; it's in my 	programming."

	"Have 	you ever seen a bare woman?"

	"Oh, 	yes, there are pictures in my data bank."

	"A 	real one ."

	"No. 	But I'm sure I 	know the description."

	She 	shook her head as if bemused. "This 	way." She walked to the pond.

	He 	followed, "Actually my data indicates that strangers do not 	readily show their bodies in public, so perhaps I should wait in the 	tent until you are through."

	"Stay."

	"But 	then—" He paused, for she had hauled off her shirt. She 	was somewhat leaner than the picture in his data bank, but it was 	clear that she was female. "I see."

	"I'll 	bet. Strip, Cyrus."

	"As 	you wish." Carefully he removed his shoes, shirt, and trousers.

	"Well, 	you look mostly human," she said,

	"I 	am nevertheless a composite, as I said. My bones may be iron, but my 	flesh is alive. I am remarkably strong, but my vessels do bleed when 	punctured, and I feel pain,"

	"Look 	at me."

	He 	had not looked since she removed her skirt, for some reason. Now he 	did as directed. Her lower half was also lean but definitely female, 	according to his stored images. That gave him an odd urge, but he 	was unable to define it, "I am looking."

	"And 	not reacting. You definitely have had no experience." She waded 	into the pond.

	"This 	is true." He followed her. Soon they were standing chest deep 	(or whatever) in the water. Her chest was rather more curvaceous 	than his. He felt slightly guilty for being intrigued.

	She 	stood beside him, eyeing him sidelong. Her glance angled off his 	shoulder and chest before striking the water beyond, raising an 	amused ripple. "You won't short out in the water or anything?"

	"No, 	I'm proof against short-circuiting. I don't have wires as such. 	Thank you for your concern."

	"That 	was irony, pun intended, not concern."

	Now 	he was almost certain she was teasing him, but he didn't know how to 	react, so he didn't. "Thank you."

	Tess 	shook her head. "You are a wonder! Come on, I'll wash your 	back." Before he could figure out how to respond, she came up 	behind him and splashed cool water across his neck and shoulders. 	Then her hands rubbed against his shoulder blades, and traveled down 	his back, under the water. "How's that feel?"

	Actually 	it felt good. The flesh of his back was tight from traveling, and 	her touch made it relax. "Satisfactory."

	"That 	so? How about this?" Her hands moved down and squeezed his 	bottom.

	"That 	feels good in a different way," he said, surprised.

	"Really?" 	She seemed to be stifling laughter. "Now it's your turn. Do 	me.'' She turned around.

	He 	turned to face her back. He stroked her shoulders as she had stroked 	his. then moved down her back, and finally squeezed her bottom. It 	was considerably plumper than his, despite her general leanness. 	There was something really evocative about it. "You have a—a 	nice—posterior," he said haltingly.

	Tess 	shook her head. "You really, truly, don't know," she said.

	A 	bulb flashed over his head. "Does this relate to what every man 	wants?"

	"Oh, 	yes, Cyrus."

	"Please, 	won't you tell me? This is making me feel strange ."

	She 	sighed, "I thought you were just another man on the make. I 	see you are truly innocent. You have the information in your 	memory, but you don't know how to apply it to the real world. 	You haven't existed long enough. You are adult mainly 	in body, not experience."

	"That 	seems to be true."

	"And 	I've been teasing you, trying to make you reveal your real nature, I 	shouldn't have."

	"Oh, 	I am sure you are without fault."

	'Thank 	you." She considered half a moment more, then made a decision. 	"Since I teased you, I will untease you. I will show you what 	you need to know,"

	"I 	would really appreciate that."

	"What 	men want is to seduce young women."

	"Seduce?"

	"Persuade 	them to assist in signaling the stork."

	Cyrus 	was amazed. "But only married people do that."

	Tess 	stood before him, her hands on his upper arms, "This is one of 	the differences between what goes into proper data banks and what 	exists in the real world. People can signal the stork without being 	married. Elders may frown on it, but it happens."

	"I—didn't 	know."

	"Precisely. 	But I will persuade you." She squeezed his arms, "Put your 	arms around me and 	bring me close to you. We will do it now,"

	"But 	we're standing in 	the water!"

	"Another 	myth. It can be done anywhere, any way up. 	Embrace me. Do it,"

	He 	put his arms around her and drew 	her in until she was right up against him. 	She suddenly seemed twice as shapely as 	before, especially in front. "This is amazing."

	"Indeed. 	Now let's say that you have captured me, and want to go farther A 	kiss would be persuasive."

	"It 	would?"

	"Kiss 	me, idiot,"

	Oh. 	He brought his face down to hers, and hesitated, "On the—7"

	She 	jammed her mouth against his, kissing him 	avidly. He felt as if his head were floating off his neck. This was 	a level of experience he had never imagined.

	She 	drew back a little, "Now stroke my bottom, as before, but more 	firmly."

	He 	obeyed. It was as though he were fondling a fine sculpture, evoking 	a strong yet loving reaction. "Oh, Tess, that makes me want 	to—" Again he ran out of concept.

	"To 	summon the stork. Exactly as any man in 	this situation would. The 	next step is to—"

	"BRA-A-AAY!"

	They 	both jumped half out of the water, falling away from 	each other Don was there by the shore, 	having awakened from his snooze.

	"You 	silly ass!" Tess exclaimed angrily,

	"He's 	not silly, he's a smart ass," Cyrus reminded her. "He told 	you."

	"I 	just wanted to remind you it's getting late," the donkey said. 	"You need to get out of the water 	while you can still see your way."

	The 	woman shook herself, evidently annoyed about something. Then she 	made some kind of internal decision. "He's right. I think you 	have the idea now. When you get a woman like that, 	that's what you do. You understand what to 	do with her."

	"Yes, 	I do," Cyrus agreed. He was almost disappointed that Don had 	not waited to interrupt them a few minutes later "Thank you."

	"You're 	welcome." She seemed partly frustrated and partly relieved.

	They 	emerged from the pool, dried off, and went to their separate beds. 	Cyrus's feelings were in turmoil, Tess was right: he did want what 	she had shown him. Yet he knew it was not customary on so brief an 	acquaintance. So surely it was best that the donkey had interrupted 	them.

	"If 	you wish, I will join you on your bed," Tess said from the 	nearby darkness. 'To keep you warm."

	Cyrus 	knew that he would never be able to control himself if she did that. 	He did not want to antagonize hen It really wasn't cool enough to 	warrant such help. So he demurred. "Thank you, but I am warm 	enough."

	"Okay." 	She sounded vaguely disappointed. That was surely his imperfect 	imagination. Why would a woman want to keep a cyborg warm?

	"Don't 	let the tics bite you."

	'The 	whats?"

	"Bugs 	that hide in your bed and bite when you're asleep. Such as robot 	tics, that make you get all metal and jerky."

	"Oh, 	that would not affect me. I am already part metal, but not, I hope, 	a jerk."

	She 	laughed for some reason, "Or synthe tics, made of plastic and 	metal."

	"Yes, 	of course,"

	"Or 	roman tics, bred in a love spring, that make you amorous."

	Cyrus 	suspected that one of those had already gotten him, but he didn't 	want to admit that. "Thank you. I'll be careful."

	That 	was all. Yet somehow he felt immensely frustrated. What was the 	matter with him? He had learned a lot, but realized that though he 	was indeed interested in summoning the stork, he still wasn't 	satisfied about the course of his life.

	Well, 	tomorrow he would reach the Good Magician's Castle. The Good 	Magician would surely know. The GM knew everything.

	Cyrus 	did not need a lot of sleep, but it was the human thing to do, so he 	lay still and turned his animation low.

	In 	the morning they harvested fresh eggs from the eggplants, bread from 	the breadfruit tree, and grape and strawberry jellyfish from the 	pond. Tess showed him how to get fresh cups of hot tea from the 	T-Tree, It was very good.

	It 	was time to resume traveling. "Thank you for your assistance," 	Cyrus told Tess. "It has been nice being with you,"

	"It 	could have been nicer,"

	"I 	don't understand."

	She 	sighed. "Of course you don't. But next time you get bare with a 	woman, see that the donkey is nowhere near."

	"I 	 will try to do that," he agreed, perplexed.

	"Let's 	get a move on," Don said impatiently. "We don't have all 	day."

	"Which 	way arc you going?" Tess asked.

	"West, 	to the Good Magician's Castle."

	"I'm 	going east."

	"So 	we may not meet again."

	"We 	may not," she agreed.

	The 	exchange was somehow unsatisfactory, but Cyrus couldn't figure out 	how to correct it. He mounted Don and rode out of the campsite.

	They 	almost collided with a slight man coming in, "Oops, my fault," 	the man said. "I wasn't watching where I was going."

	"Neither 	was I," Cyrus said. Then, for want of anything else to say, he 	introduced himself "I am Cyrus Cyborg, and this is Don Donkey, 	a robot ass.' '

	"I 	am Trojan. S Trojan, a meek man."

	Cyrus's 	memory bank whirred. That was the name Tess was looking for. 	"There is a woman you must meet."

	"Oh, 	I would be too shy. I am considered effeminate. Women aren't much 	interested in me."

	"This 	may be the exception. Come, I'll introduce you to her." He 	jumped off the donkey and led the way back.

	Tess 	was packing her things into her backpack, about to depart. "What 	the bleep is this?" she demanded irritably. Perhaps she had 	eaten another dislike-en.

	'This 	is Trojan," Cyrus said. "S Trojan."

	She 	looked stricken. It was almost as if she would have preferred to use 	less coarse language in this instance.

	"I 	really didn't mean to bother you," Trojan said apologetically, 	"I am on an unlikely quest to find my ideal Significant Other, 	assuming such a person exists."

	Tess 	recovered. "Come here, Trojan."

	"I 	beg your pardon?"

	She 	strode forward, sweeping him up in a hearty embrace. "You are 	the one I have been looking for!"

	"I 	don't understand. I'm just a nonentity."

	"Shut 	up or I'll kiss you."

	"You 	will what?"

	She 	kissed him. "Never call my bluff."

	"I 	confess that is heady stuff. But what would a fine woman like you 	want with a nothing like me?"

	"I 	think he's grimy from travel," Cyrus said. "He'll need to 	wash up in the pond."

	She 	shot him a look of naughty gratitude. "Yes. I'll join him 	there." She carried Trojan away.

	Cyrus 	returned to the donkey, feeling elated. He had managed to do a good 	deed.

	"I 	don't understand," Don said.

	"Naturally 	not," Cyrus agreed smugly.

	They 	had not gone far before they heard someone crying. It was a girl, 	staring wildly around. "Don't stop," Don muttered, "We 	can't let silly females slow us down. That pushy Tess was bad 	enough."

	But 	Cyrus had another idea. "I'm trying to learn about women. I 	learned a lot last night, but I'm sure there's still more. Also, I 	have an empathy circuit that makes me want to help folk in need."

	"Suit 	yourself, sucker. Fortunately I lack that silly-ass circuit. Chances 	are you won't be able to help her anyway."

	They 	approached the girl. "May I help you?" Cyrus asked 	gallantly as he dismounted, still flush from his success with Tess.

	"I 	don't think so," the girl said. "I'm Xina, I can change my 	hair at will." As she spoke her hair changed from short brown 	to flowing blond. "I'm supposed to join a play ensemble as an 	actress, but I can't find it."

	"A 	play group?" Fiends."

	Cyrus's 	data bank whirled. "Those are mainly organized by the Curse."

	"No, 	this is supposed to be right around here," she insisted. "Only 	it isn't. I don't know what to do."

	Cyrus 	had no idea what to do. "Neither do I. Maybe you should ask the 	Good Magician."

	"I 	just came from him," she flared, her 	hair turning fiery red. "I asked him 	what was my 	destiny, and he said to act in this 	ensemble that is forming here. Only there's nothing. I owe a year's 	service for this'.'" She broke down in tears again,

	"I 	told you," Don said.

	"Oh, 	a talking mule!" Xina exclaimed.

	"Ass."

	"What?" 	She looked as if she had heard a bad word.

	"Donkey," 	Cyrus said. "He is a robot."

	"I 	love horses," Xina said, her grief evaporating. "He looks 	a lot like a small horse. May I pet him?"

	Don 	eyed her assessingly. "Do you like asses?"

	"Four-footed 	ones, yes. You're quite handsome, like your companion."

	"Then 	you may pet me."

	Xina 	did so. "You have such a nice 	metal mane."

	"Yours 	is pretty nice too." Don was mellowing considerably, 	coincidentally.

	"Could 	I ride you?"

	"Hop 	on."

	Cyrus 	was unable to help with her problem. There had to be some mistake. 	Then he thought of something. "Don can stay with you until I 	return, as the castle is surely close by. I'll 	try to ascertain where the ensemble is 	really supposed to be. It is surely a clerical error."

	"Do 	you really think so?" she asked, brightening.

	Cyrus 	was doubtful, but couldn't say that. "All I can do is ask."

	"Oh, 	thank you," she said. She leaned down 	from the donkey and kissed him on the ear.

	Cyrus 	 was too startled to react. He stood there, the lingering 	impression of the kiss caressing his ear. He had had no idea that 	a woman could practice such magic.

	Then 	Don moved away, carrying Xina, and Cyrus was alone. Well, 	it was time to 	get on to the Good 	Magician's Castle.





	Chapter 2: Challenges


	The 	Good Magician's Castle was a pretty sight, nestled within a circular 	moat in a lightly forested valley. There was a bird flying over the 	moat, a turtle dove. Then it dove into the water with a splash and 	swam away. Oh, not a bird, but a flying turtle that dived, or dove 	as the case might be.

	He 	followed the path directly to it. But just before he got there, he 	found the way partly barred by an open shack beside the path. A 	placard perched on its roof said sand witch SHOPPE.

	Cyrus 	wasn't sure he wanted to mess with a witch, so he skirted the stand. 	But the Sand Witch appeared, an ugly old crone with a pointed black 	hat, calling out to him. "Buy a knuckle sandwich, stranger! 	It's a real bash in the mouth."

	Could 	he avoid it? He tried, "Thank you, but I'm not hungry at the 	moment."

	"Bleep! 	My shoppe is off the beaten path, I don't get much business."

	"I 	regret that," he said, edging on by. If this was a Challenge, 	it did not seem to be much of one. He didn't trust that. His memory 	bank indicated that there were always three Challenges to querents 	seeking to enter the castle, and they were always devious. What was 	he missing?

	"You'll 	be back, if you know what's good for you," the witch said 	wrathfully.

	" 	I have little notion what's good for me," he said. It was truer 	than he liked.

	"Would 	you change your mind if I looked like this?" She became a 	luscious young witch with restless brown hair and a prominent bosom 	trying to escape from an inadequate halter. He would hardly have 	recognized her, except that she wore the same conical hat.

	He 	considered. "Are you of barbarian stock?"

	"Of 	course not. I'm of witchly stock."

	'Then 	I think I wouldn't change my mind."

	She 	gazed at him a moment in perplexity. "You're an oddity."

	"I'm 	a cyborg."

	She 	sighed, putting a severe strain on the halter. "Maybe that 	explains it. Well, if you should get hungry for anything, I will 	still be here."

	The 	mere sight of her made him hungry for something, but he was sure 	this was not the occasion for that. He regretted that Tess Tosterone 	had not managed to educate him further "Thank you." He 	moved on. leaving her shaking her head.

	The 	path shortly wended its way to another shop. This was an array of 	large colored stones. In fact they were boulders. The sign said 	enuff tuff stuff—rock & 	roll. The 	proprietor was snoozing behind a stone counter shaped like an 	upside-down funnel. He was a big tough-looking man who hardly seemed 	to need the softly shaped bed rock he lay on.

	Cyrus 	paused, curious. Surely all this was here for a reason, but he 	couldn't fathom what it was.

	The 	man woke and jumped off his rock bed. "Hi. stranger! I'm Tuff. 	What can I sell you? I have stone galore, from the very best 	volcanoes."

	"I'm 	really not in the market for stone," Cyrus said. "Though 	what you have here is pretty."

	"Are 	you sure? Any rock you buy, I roll into place for you. It makes 	excellent walls, foundations, statues. There's an island almost 	surrounded by tuff statues, a marvelous sight."

	"Surely 	it is," Cyrus agreed. "But I'm not here to build anything. 	I just want to see the Good Magician."

	"Suit 	yourself." Tuff settled back into his snooze.

	Cyrus 	moved on. Surely all this made sense in some fashion. Maybe as a 	cyborg he just wasn't equipped to appreciate it.

	He 	heard screaming and laughter ahead. A sign said beware 	the strip tide. He still didn't get the 	relevance.

	Then 	the path ended in an inlet of water, maybe part of the moat. It was 	tilled with swimming bare girls who were screaming and splashing 	each other Were they nymphs?

	One 	spied him. "Hi! Who are you?"

	"I 	am Cyrus Cyborg. I want to see the Good Magician."

	She 	laughed. "Don't we all! But we tried to swim across, and got 	caught by the strip tide.

	Don't 	try it yourself, unless you want to join us."

	"Strip 	tide?" He remembered the warning sign.

	"It's 	a wave that strips whoever it catches. We're all embarrassingly 	bare." She eyed him, not seeming much embarrassed, "Still, 	we might have some fun if you joined us." She glanced across 	the water, where some bare children played. "We'd have to 	banish the sea urchins for a while of course; Adult Conspiracy, you 	know."

	But 	Cyrus remained a bit nervous about fun with women. Tess had shown 	him that he desired such contact, but he wanted to know more about 	it before getting bare with dozens of girls. Otherwise he would 	surely embarrass himself. "Thank you, but I think I can't 	afford such a diversion at this time. I need to see the Good 	Magician,"

	She 	shrugged, flashing some interesting wet flesh in the process. "Are 	you sure?"

	"I 	am not at all sure. It's a judgment call."

	She 	eyed him somewhat the way the Witch had. "You seem remarkably 	candid."

	"I'm 	a cyborg," he reminded her, "I don't have much experience 	with human duplicity."

	She 	nodded. "I like that. Most men are eager to deceive girls in my 	position," She took a deep breath so he could properly 	appreciate her position. "I am Aero Nymph. I came to ask the 	Good Magician what my talent might be, and he told me I'd find out 	in the course of my Service for the Answer. It seems it's somehow 	tied in with my name, I can quit any time I learn it, without 	completing my Service, since I won't need the Answer if I figure it 	out for myself. But so far I'm baffled. So here I am, trying to 	tempt you into the water." She frowned cutely. "Don't do 	it. It won't hurt you to be bare, but you will wash out of the 	Challenge and never get to see the Good Magician."

	Cyrus 	hesitated. "As I said, I don't properly understand duplicity. 	Why would you tell me this, if it is your job to prevent me from 	passing?"

	"I'm 	a sucker for honesty. It forces me to be honest in return."

	Cyrus 	ran her name through his data bank, and came up with a near match. 	"Acronym!"

	"What?"

	"It 	means forming words from the first letters, or first few letters, of 	other words. Maybe that's your talent."

	She 	frowned, "But can't anybody do that? Just take any words and 	use their first letters? How would that qualify as a magic talent?"

	"I 	don't know. Maybe it's a bad idea."

	"I'm 	not sure of that. Maybe I just need to figure out how it applies."

	"I'll 	ponder further," Cyrus said. "Maybe it will come to me."

	"But 	if it does, you'll be long gone from here and unable to tell me. 	What good would that do me?"

	"None," 	Cyrus said regretfully. "I'm sorry I couldn't be more helpful."

	'That's 	all right, I think you've given me part of the answer. I'll mull it 	over. Thank you so much." •

	"You're 	welcome." He gazed at the water, with its array of nymphs, "I 	thought there were supposed to be moat monsters."

	"There 	are, normally. But Souffle and Sesame Serpent took Serendipity to 	visit the Castle Roogna moat, leaving this one temporarily vacant."

	"Serendipity?" 	he asked, not finding that name in his data bank.

	"Their 	new baby daughter. Serendipity Serpent, They found her in a gene 	pool, of course. Her talent is to spontaneously tind things she's 	not looking for. She's really cute, if you like that type."

	"I'm 	sure she is. I'm just not keen on encountering moat monsters. It has 	to do with my physical health."

	She 	glanced at him again. "Youre handsome. I'd like to kiss you. I 	promise not to drag you into the water I'll come out of it for the 	moment." She swam to the bank and put her feet down, starting 	to lift her upper body out of the water. Much more flesh showed. Her 	chest was—

	Cyrus's 	vision blurred. His eyes were locked on her, unable to look away. 	"Something's wrong," he said. "My eyes are 	corroding."

	"Oh, 	bleep!" she said. "I forgot about that. Most men freak out 	at the sight of panties, but less experienced ones are susceptible 	to even bare flesh. Cover your eyes."

	He 	put up a hand, cutting off the view. His eyes relaxed, though 	dangerous circular afterimages still stalked them. "That must 	have been it."

	"I'll 	be there in a moment. Stay covered."

	He 	heard water dripping from her bare body. The very thought of her 	touch got him all hot and nervous. "Please—I'm not sure I 	could—could handle your kiss. I need to proceed without such a 	distraction." He half hoped she would ignore his demurral.

	She 	stopped. "I understand. Good luck." She splashed back into 	the water. "Bye, Cyrus."

	"Bye, 	Aero." Yet he wondered: if this was a Challenge, why was she 	letting him go? In fact why had the Witch and Tuff the rock salesman 	been so ready to let him pass?

	Cyrus 	uncovered his eyes and walked along the bank, seeking some way 	across. Wasn't there supposed to be a drawbridge? He found none. 	Instead he located the Wave, the strip tide, rippling restlessly as 	if seeking more victims. Whenever it passed a girl, she screamed and 	seemed to be another stage barer, if that was possible.

	He 	raised his hand again to break the threatening lock on his gaze that 	the screaming girls generated. He was fortunate that none of them 	was wearing panties, because that would have finished him. As it 	was, their swimming and diving had him on the very verge of the 	brink of a freak, especially when their legs flashed up out of the 	water.

	Could 	he plunge in and swim when the tide wasn't there? Maybe if he did it 	right behind the Wave, so it would take time to circle around and 	pass this way again. Then he saw the Wave abruptly reverse course. 	It was unpredictable. So that was no good.

	He 	noticed that the giris were very similar in appearance. In fact they 	seemed identical. Were there really that many nymphs—or was 	there just one, replicated by illusion to fill the moat? Did it 	matter? One would be more than enough to embarrass him if she caught 	him naked in the water. Tess had cleariy meant well, after her 	initial distrust of him; he had no guarantee the nymph did, despite 	her seeming candor. Maybe she was there not just to demonstrate the 	danger. Maybe she was the 	danger. The Challenge was to get across without being humiliated.

	It 	was best not to risk it. He needed to find a way to get across 	without entering the water.

	Then 	he thought of something. Enuff tuff stuff—sufHcient to form a 	ramp or causeway across the moat, so that he could walk. That must 	be the key.

	He 	returned to the stone shop. "I'd like a fair quantity of your 	wares, if you please. Enough to cross the moat."

	"That's 	a big order," Tuff remarked.

	"How 	may I obtain it?"

	Tuff 	considered. "I'd trade it for one really good snack. I haven't 	eaten since dawn. But none of this bland nothing that passes for 	food; I want something with a kick."

	Aha. 	"How about a knuckle sandwich? I understand its a real bash in 	the mouth."

	'That's 	the kind," Tuff agreed.

	Cyrus 	walked back to the Sand Witch Shoppe. The witch was back in her old 	homely form. Maybe that was just as well. "Hello, Witch."

	"You 	again? I thought you were doing a void dance."

	"A 	what?"

	"A 	void dance. It's what folk use to get out of trouble or avoid 	anything else, such as ugly old witches."

	"Avoidance," 	he echoed. It was a pun.

	"So 	what do you want?"

	"I'll 	take a knuckle sandwich. What do you require in return?"

	"I'm 	bored as bleep. I'd trade it for one good laugh."

	What 	would make a witch laugh? That was a challenge indeed. His mind 	sifted through the humor section of his data bank.

	And 	found something. He fetched a stick from beside the path, then used 	it to beat madly at the path.

	"What 	are you doing?" the witch demanded.

	"I'm 	beating the path," he explained. "So that you are truly 	off the beaten path."

	"That's 	crazy!" But in half a moment her expression changed. "It's 	crazy enough to be funny. Oh, no—I think I'm going to laugh." 	She struggled with herself, but the laugh surged up and finally 	burst out, hurling her back against her shoppe wall. Piled 	sandwiches fell off the shelf, half burying her. "Ha-ha-ha! 	Ho-ho-ho!" Her form seemed to be changing back to young and 	full, as she lost control.

	Cyrus 	doubted that it was really that funny, but this was a Challenge, and 	the witch was probably keyed to laugh at any reasonable attempt. "So 	if I may have that sandwich now ...''

	One 	foot lifted from the pile, bearing a sandwich. The foot was on a 	marvelously bare and well formed leg. He squinted to focus only on 	the sandwich and accepted it. "Thank you." He shut his 	eyes until he could turn away from the leg.

	The 	sandwich was shaped like a big fist with protruding knuckles. Cyrus 	kept it well away from his face. He carried it back to Tuff's 	domain. "Here is your knuckle sandwich." He handed it 	over.

	The 	man took it and lifted it to his mouth. The sandwich leaped forward 	and smashed into his face. "Hoo!" Tuff exclaimed, licking 	off a spot of blood from his lip. "This one's smashing."

	"As 	represented," Cyrus agreed, bemused.

	Tuff 	had at the sandwich. The next time it tried to smash him, he met it 	with open mouth, and chomped down on a knuckle. The sandwich didn't 	give up, but every time it jabbed, it encountered the stony teeth 	again, and lost another joint. Finally it was gone.

	"Great 	stuff," Tuff said, "I haven't had one of those in years. 	Really punches me up."

	"You're 	welcome," Cyrus said,

	"Now 	you want stone for the moat," Tuff said, getting back to 	business. He bent forward, put his hands on an orange boulder, and 	heaved. The stone rolled onto the path. Tuff heaved again, keeping 	it going, until at last it rolled into the water of the moat with a 	satisfying splash.

	"Eeeek!" 	the nymphs screamed cutely in unison.

	"Sorry 	about that. Aero," Tuff said, looking at several of the nymphs 	without freaking out.

	"Are 	not," they chorused. "Did it on purpose."

	"Well, 	sure, but it's part of the Challenge." Tuff turned about and 	walked back to his shop.

	The 	nearest nymph looked at Cyrus. "So you're figuring it out."

	"I 	seem to be, yes," he agreed,

	"I 	want to come with you, I think you'll figure out the rest of my 	riddle, in time."

	Could 	she do that? "You'd freak me out."

	"I'd 	put on new clothing, silly," she said. "I promise not to 	freak you out unless you ask me to. May I join you?"

	Cyrus 	suspected he should say no, but it was difficult to do. "Yes, 	if you're sure.''

	"Thanks! 	I'll meet you at the far side." She and the other nymphs swam 	away.

	Tuff 	returned with another boulder. "She's a nice girl," he 	remarked as the stone splashed into the water. "A man could do 	worse."

	"All 	she wants is for me to figure out her magic talent."

	"Well, 	sure, but she's still worthwhile, I'd have taken her, had she been 	interested. The nights get lonely. There must be something about 	you." He went back for another boulder.

	Cyrus 	was afraid he was getting in trouble, without even meaning to. Tess 	had been attracted to him. and it seemed the Witch also, and now 	Aero. Sure, he had been created handsome, but was that all that 	women cared about? Could this have any bearing on his destiny? If 	so. he really needed to sort it out soon.

	In 	due course the boulders formed a ramp across the moat. "There 	you are," Tuff said as the last one splashed into place. "Good 	luck."

	"Thank 	you." Cyrus stepped carefully from boulder to boulder, crossing 	the moat without touching the water. The Wave hovered, as if hoping 	he would fall in so it could pounce, but he disappointed it. He had 	navigated the first Challenge.

	"Congratulations," 	Aero said as he stepped onto the inner bank. She was now garbed in 	blouse, skirt, and slippers, none of which detracted from her 	appeal. However, it was now possible for him to look at her without 	his eyeballs locking up. "I'm not allowed to help you with the 	other Challenges, but I will cheer you on."

	"Thank 	you."

	"Are 	you sure you wouldn't like me to kiss you?"

	"I 	am not sure. That's probably why you shouldn't do it."

	"I 	don't think I quite understand."

	"It 	might make my mind freak out, so I would not be able to pass the 	remaining Challenges."

	"Oh. 	Yes, of course. That's very logical."

	"Robots 	are supremely logical. I'm half robot."

	"What's 	the other half?"

	"Barbarian. 	That makes me ill-equipped to handle civilized things, especially 	women."

	"You 	are fascinating."

	He 	assumed that was a compliment. "Thank you."

	He 	looked ahead. He was in a kind of garden swarming with ants. They 	were large and looked aggressive.

	He 	stepped forward. Immediately the ants formed a line, lifting front 	legs with weapons: little spears, clubs, swords, and whips. "I 	don't like the look of this," he muttered.

	"They 	won't let you pass," Aero said. She was standing near an ant, 	but it ignored her "This is the next Challenge."

	He 	had gathered as much. He suspected that the little weapons would be 	most painful to his ankles. In fact some ants had little buckets of 	fire. Those would be fire ants.

	That 	gave him an idea. Were the others of individual types? Maybe if he 	identified them, they would let him by. It was the kind of 	intellectual challenge the Good Magician was known for.

	He 	moved toward the closest ant,

	"Halt!" 	its tiny voice cried. "I will defend my domain to the death!"

	"You're 	a Warrior Ant," Cyrus said.

	"True, 	and you shall not pass, intruder," The ant raised its spear 	threateningly.

	He 	had identified it, but it still would not let him pass. Had he 	figured it out wrong? He sifted through his memory bank. Endless 	information was there, but he didn't know how to adapt it to this 	situation. He had to use the thinking portion of his brain.

	What 	had he not done? Often in Xanth things had to be taken literally, 	and with a groaning admixture of puns. Was he supposed to make the 	ant laugh, as he had with the witch?

	Then 	a bulb flashed. That always startled him, though it was a standard 	effect when someone got a sudden bright idea. There was a pun of 	sorts. "You're a Defend Ant," he said.

	"O 	bleep, he got it," the ant swore. "I have to let him 	pass," It stepped aside. "Pass, jerk."

	'Thank 	you." Cyrus stepped past.

	But 	immediately there was another ant in the way. "Didn't you get 	the message, idiot? We don't want you here."

	"What 	message was that?"

	"I 	sent you an a-mail. You lacked the courtesy to answer. You shall not 	pass.' '

	A-mail. 	That would be the ants' version of e-mail. But where was the pun? 	"I'm sorry, I didn't receive it."

	"The 	bleep you didn't, rogue! It's right there in your pocket."

	Cyrus 	looked. There was a small note tucked into his breast pocket. It 	must have gotten there magically; a-mail was surely like that. He 	took it out and read it. go away, failure to ACKNOWLEDGE THIS 	CORRESPONDENCE WILL NOT ALTER ITS IMPORT. YOU HAVE BEEN WARNED.

	Correspondence, 	New he got it. "You're a Comespond Ant."

	"Bleep," 	the ant said, as ungracious as the first. "Thought I had you." 	It stood aside.

	But 	there was another ant. It seemed that ants came not single-spy. but 	in battalions. "Not so fast, ruffian," this one said. "I 	am going to keep after you until you quit. I will never give over."

	And 	what ant word was this describing? Cyrus got belatedly smart and 	sifted through his vocabulary data bank, checking through 	definitions for words ending in ant. There it was. "Persist 	Ant."

	"You're 	a real spoilsport, know that?" the ant complained, standing 	aside.

	The 	next one was ready. "I am fully acquainted with your recent 	history, and know how to handle you, invader Begone."

	Fully 	acquainted, knowledgeable. He sifted again. "Convers ant."

	"You're 	no fun at all," the ant griped, standing aside.

	Then 	next ant was a squalling baby. Cyrus got it right away. "Inf 	Ant." The squalling increased, but the ant moved aside.

	But 	the ants had just begun to fight. Another blocked his way. The 	mental energy was making Cyrus hot; he was getting sweaty. He looked 	for a cloth to wipe his forehead, but of course there was none.

	"I 	can fix that," the ant said. "No sweat. Just depart."

	No 	sweat? That was an odd phrase, since ants didn't sweat anyway. Which 	gave it away. "Antiperspir Ant."

	"We 	are going to have to make a judgment here," the next ant said. 	"You have no—"

	"Adjudic 	ant."

	The 	next ant spit in disgust. "Go—"

	"Expector 	Ant."

	He 	continued on through Miscre, Disinfect, Mendic, Contest, Merch, 	Eleph, Inform, Flagr, Claim, and Consult. At last the last of them 	had been identified, and he was through the ant farm. The second 	Challenge was done.

	Now 	he faced a barren waste. Dust was everywhere. It covered the ground, 	the cacti, the stones, even the resting animals. There was a 	dust-covered path wending its way onward through rocks and rills, 	the latter looking disgusted about the situation.

	Cyrus 	paused. Was this all? Surely it couldn't be as easy as merely 	following the path to wherever it led. Yet what else was there to 	do?

	He 	stepped onto the path. Dust billowed up in small clouds, settling on 	his legs and feet. Messy but harmless.

	Then 	there was a stirring in the distance, A big dust cloud was whirling 	toward him, spreading so much dust that everything behind it was 	obscured. It came right up to him, and then he was in the middle of 	it, choking on it, unable to see anything. It was a small dust 	storm.

	He 	stepped back. Then things cleared; he was technically outside the 	scene, which remained obscure.

	This, 	then, was the Challenge: to follow the path through the scene—when 	he was unable to see anything. He might put on goggles, if he had 	them, to protect his eyes, and a mask to filter the air he breathed, 	but there would be no way to fathom the path. He was sure he would 	have to follow the path exactly, or he wouldn't find its end.

	He 	pondered. First, he knew that there had to be some way through, if 	he could just figure it out. Second, something was stirring up the 	dust; if he could nullify that, he should be all right. What could 	it be, and how could he deal with it? It looked like a small dust 	storm.

	He 	remembered something. "Dusty!" he exclaimed.

	The 	whirlwind coalesced into a small female devil. She was pretty in a 	dusty outfit, with little horns. "That's Dusti," she said, 	"Get it right, dummy."

	"Oh! 	I took you for someone else."

	"My 	little brother Dusty, of course. He has no ambition, I do. That's 	why I'm here."

	"Your 	purpose is to prevent me from crossing, by stirring up so much dust 	I can't see my way."

	She 	eyed him sidelong. Somehow that glance made her seem fuller bodied 	than before. "You're pretty smart for a querent."

	"So 	I have to figure out how to nullify you so I can get through."

	"Duh."

	"There 	has to be something here that will enable me to accomplish that."

	"You 	know, you're sorta cute." She dissolved into whirling dust, 	then reformed, larger and fuller, "Maybe I'll kiss you. We can 	improvise from there."

	Was 	she coming on to him? This was odd indeed. "What interest would 	a dust devil have in a mere cyborg?"

	Her 	head dissolved into whirling dust as she considered, then reformed. 	"I don't know. But there's something about you that makes me 	want to impress you.' '

	"I'm 	not very impressive,"

	"I 	didn't say you were. I said I want to impress you. That's 	different."

	She 	was correct. But the larger mystery remained: what interest did any 	of these young women have in him? He didn't know, and none of them 	seemed to know either, "Well, I'm going to set about defeating 	you so that I can talk to the Good Magician."

	"That 	would impress me." She dissolved into the whirlwind again, then 	lurched toward him. He felt the imprint of lips on his as the dust 	swirled around his head. She had, indeed, kissed him.

	He 	focused on the Challenge. How could he get through, when he couldn't 	see anything? Could he get down on hands and knees and feel his way 	along the path under the dust?

	He 	tried that. Immediately the dust devil enveloped him, forcing him to 	jam his eyes and mouth shut. He felt kisses on his ears and neck. 	She was indulging herself while keeping up with her business.

	His 	strategy didn't work. There was so much dust that whatever was under 	it was indistinct. He could not tell what was path and what was 	ordinary land. He had to be wrong, because soon he banged into the 	trunk of a big tree.

	What 	kind of tree was it? It hardly seemed to matter, but he was curious 	what variety would grow in perpetual dust. He felt the bark, and 	found it smooth. He tapped it, and there was a half-hollow sound. He 	sifted his memory, seeking to match sound to wood.

	And 	got it. This was a beer-barrel tree, with a huge cylindrical trunk 	filled or partly filled with beer. Or was it? He tapped again, 	analyzing the sound. No. not beer, but ale; this was an ale tree. 	Its beverage would be a bit stronger.

	That 	gave him a wicked idea. How much experience did Dusti have with 	strong ale? She was obviously of age to drink it if she wanted to, 	but might not have done so before. If he could get her to drink 	some, it might impair her judgment and make her forget to stir up so 	much dust.

	He 	worked his way around the trunk until he found a spigot. He turned 	it on and caught a little fluid in the palm of one hand. He sipped 	it.

	"That's 	certainly, really, awfully good," he murmured. And paused, 	considering. Why had he chosen those superfluous words?

	The 	question brought the answer. This was adverbi ale, that caused the 	drinker to use too many words ending in LY. He had taken only a sip, 	so only three had gotten out.

	Unfortunately 	he didn't see how that would stop the dust devil. He might get her 	to drink some, but she would catch on the moment the LYs came 	spewing out. He needed a brew that would get her tipsy without side 	effects.

	Still, 	there was hope. He crawled on, seeking another tree. There might be 	a better one for his purpose, as they tended to grow in groves.

	He 	found one, and tried it—and went into a coughing tit. That was 	bronchi ale, and congested the lungs. That was no good.

	Or 	was it? Maybe he could after all make it work.

	He 	fetched the butter cup he kept in reserve. He had long since used up 	its butter, and saved the cup as a folded yellow sac. He opened it, 	held it under the spigot, and filled it with ale. Then he drew the 	petal flap over to seal it in. He was ready.

	He 	stood up, "Dusti!" he called. "I have something for 	you."

	The 	whirling wind coalesced into the she-devil. "What is it?"

	"A 	cup of ale."

	"Ale?"

	"Bronchi 	Ale, from a local ale-barrel tree."

	She 	made a face. "I don't drink that stuff. It interferes with my 	wind."

	"Too 	bad." He opened the cup and dumped it on her head.

	Immediately 	she went into a coughing fit. "You—cough—despicable— 	cough—scheming—cough—lout!"

	"Maybe 	you shouldn't have kissed me," he remarked as the dust settled 	out of the air around them.

	She 	changed to whirlwind form, but it too was racked by coughing. Its 	winds went yon and hither, randomly, unable to maintain a tight 	circle.

	Cyrus 	walked along the path that was becoming visible again. Dusty resumed 	devil form and intercepted 	him. "You—cough—tricked—cough—me!

	I—cough—ought—cough—to—cough—kiss 	you—cough—into—cough—oblivion!"

	"I'd 	like to see you try," he said amicably as he strode along.

	She 	jammed up against him, bringing her face to his. But she was so 	wracked by coughs that she couldn't complete 	the act. "Bleep—cough—it!" 	she swore. "Bleep—cough—it—cough—to—cough—cough!" 	She was unable to finish.

	"This 	way." he said, pausing. He caught her by her heaving 	shoulders, brought her in close, and kissed her on the forehead.

	"COUGH 	you!" she said villainously. "If I—cough—could 	just—cough—get my breath—"

	"To 	be sure." He let her go and stepped off the path into the 	castle proper. He had made it through the third Challenge.





	Chapter 3: Assignment


	A 	woman was waiting for him just within. 	"Welcome, Cyrus Cyborg," she said, looking him in the 	eye. "I am Wira, the Good Magician's daughter in law. He is 	 busy at the moment, but Sofia and I will give you 	the necessary background."

	"Background?"

	"For 	your Assignment. Your Service. It is important."

	"But 	I don't have my Answer yet."

	"That 	relates. This way, please."

	He 	followed her, two fifths bemused. He knew of Wira, of course; she 	was in his memory bank as Magician Humfrey's favorite daughter in 	law. But there was something odd about her. About the way she had 	looked him in the eye.

	That 	was it, "You're not blind!" he exclaimed.

	"Not 	any more," she agreed. "But I am not yet fully 	acclimatized to vision, so tend to close my eyes when navigating the 	castle. It's more comfortable."

	"But 	how—?"

	"It 	is a long and dull story. Nimby gave me sight,"

	Nimby. 	That was the donkey-headed dragon aspect of the Demon Xanth, another 	long story. Certainly he was capable of doing it, if he chose. "I 	see. As it were."

	Wira 	smiled. She was an older woman, fifty-six chronologically, 	thirty-four physically, because she had been youthened to marry the 	Good Magician's son. But she was pretty when she smiled. "There 	is much to be seen," she agreed.

	They 	came to what looked like an expanded closet. There was a drab woman 	sorting a huge pile of socks. "This is Sofia Socksorter, the 	Designated Wife for this month," Wira said.

	Then, 	to the woman: "Mother Sofia, this is Cyrus Cyborg, the querent. 	He needs background."

	Sofia 	looked up. "Hello, Cyrus. I never met a cyborg before." 	She had a strong Mundane accent, "I must say, you are a 	handsome specimen."

	He 	was beginning to regret being created handsome. It seemed that most 	of the women he encountered had inclinations to do something with 	him, regardless whether he properly understood the details of it. 	Even someone's wife? That made him nervous, "I believe I am the 	first cyborg in Xanth," Cyrus said. "Which relates to my 	Question for the Good Magician. I need to know whether there is any 	suitable woman for me, and if so, where I might find her,"

	She 	nodded wisely, "Of course you wouldn't be satisfied with just 	any young woman who is attracted to your face. You'll be looking for 	one who truly appreciates your nature. And for that Answer you will 	embark on a remarkable secret mission."

	This 	was news. Evidently this woman did have information he wanted. He 	knew the Good Magician was apt to be very brief and taciturn—in 	simple terms, grumpy—so was unlikely to provide much beyond a 	technical response. It was surely worthwhile talking to Sofia.

	"May 	I help you with your chore?" he inquired. "I see you have 	more socks to sort that can be done in a day. It must be 	uncomfortably dull."

	She 	was surprised. "No one ever offered to help before, aside from 	Wira."

	"It's 	my empathy circuit. Am I in error to offer? I am not fully 	acclimatized to pure human ways."

	Both 	Sofia and Wira smiled. "Stay the way you are," Wira said, 	"Women prefer naivete of that nature."

	"They 	do?" It hadn't occurred to him that his very ignorance might be 	attractive.

	"We 	do," Sofia agreed. "Most men are too certain of their 	masculinity to inquire after feminine preferences, let alone sort 	socks ."'

	They 	settled down to help Sofia sort socks. They were of many types and 	colors. All were clean, having evidently been washed and dried, but 	were hopelessly jumbled together. Cyrus knew that the Good Magician 	had married Sofia because of her expertise in sorting socks, and 	that had solved his chronic problem. But she was in the castle only 	one month in five and a half, so the socks did accumulate in her 	absence. It had probably taken her a week to get them to this stage. 	Twos of a kind needed to be located and balled together for future 	use. It was easy to do, but tedious.

	"Here 	is the situation," Sofia said. "There is a young male roc 	bird with a bad attitude and a dangerous talent. It may not yet be 	of Magician caliber, but it is close, and maturing, and all too soon 	is apt to be the strongest in Xanth. You have to understand that 	Xanth could suffer enormous damage if this is not promptly dealt 	with. But there are complications."

	"Couldn't 	somebody talk to him?" Cyrus asked. "There are folk who 	speak animal dialects."

	"The 	Roc is not interested in being talked to. All he wants is power and 	the rewards of power. He means to take over the whole of Xanth as 	its monarch. Anyone who objects is rendered null."

	"Null? 	Do you mean killed?"

	"Not 	exactly. His name is Ragna Roc, and his talent is to render things 	illusory. No one dares question him, because any who have tried have 	been illusioned.' '

	"Couldn't 	a Magician or Sorceress nullify him? I understand they have 	phenomenal powers,"

	"They 	could if they could get close enough. But not only does Ragna delete 	anyone he even suspects he might not like, he lives in a hidden 	fancy rock candy castle perched on the Rock of Ages, with a harem of 	winsome roc hens. Only his closest associates know exactly where it 	is."

	"But 	there are folk who can magically fathom the direction of anything."

	"Yes. 	So we do know where it is. But we must not let him know we know, 	lest we all be deleted and need to be disillusioned. So we must 	pretend we don't know."

	"What 	about Com Pewter? Couldn't he change reality in that vicinity to 	nullify the Roc's power?"

	"At 	the moment Pewter is tied up in a contest of his own with a Magnet 	Monster. He can't help."

	"Then 	how can anyone go there to deal with him?"

	"Only 	Himself knows."

	"That 	is Good Magician Humfrey," Wira clarified. "Sofia's name 	for him."

	"Anybody's 	name for him, by rights," Sofia said. "Because he's so 	full of himself."

	She 	did not seem to have a lot of respect for the almost mythical figure 	of the Good Magician. Maybe that came of being buried in his stinky 	old socks. "Does this relate in some manner to my Service?"

	"Yes, 	You are to be the one Ragna summons to meet him. You will bring 	along the Three Princesses, who will then deal with him."

	"Do 	you mean the Princesses Melody, Harmony, and Rhythm? According to my 	information they are children, only twelve years old."

	"They 	are not ordinary children," Sofia said seriously. "They 	are general-purpose Sorceresses. Any single one of them is a full 	Sorceress in her own right, able to perform almost any magic she 	chooses. Any two of them together square that power, increasing the 	effect enormously. The three of them together cube it, making them 	the most powerful practitioners in Xanth. Nothing can stand against 	their united magic. But they have to be within range to do it, and 	Ragna would illusion them from well beyond that range if he saw them 	coming. So caution is necessary."

	"I 	see," Cyrus said, awed. "I will of course be glad to help, 	but I don't see how I can. I have no separate magic that I know; I 	think my magic is merely to exist as a composite living machine. 	Ragna would have no reason to summon me."

	"Himself 	will see to that," Sofia said. "Wira, do you think he's 	ready now?"

	"I 	will check," Wira said, hastening away.

	"Such 	a dear girl," Sofia said. "Everyone likes her. That may 	not be surprising; her talent is to relate to animals. Human beings 	are merely another variety of animal."

	"That 	makes sense," he agreed.

	"Some 	time you must get her to tell you about her adventure with Princess 	Ida's Moons. It's amazing. But she's so modest she doesn't volunteer 	it."

	"Modesty 	becomes a person," he agreed.

	"Have 	some fruit." She proffered a bowl of pretty colored greens, 	reds, yellows, blues, and oranges.

	"Thank 	you." He picked up an orange.

	"Anchors 	aweigh!" the fruit sang.

	He 	almost dropped it. "It sings!"

	"Well, 	it's a Naval Orange."

	A 	bell rang. "Battle stations!" the orange cried, rolling 	out of his hand. "All hands on deck!"

	"It's 	still got its naval conditioning," Sofia said from the stove, 	where the bell had summoned her to turn off the oven, "Maybe 	you would be better off with a different fruit."

	"Maybe 	so," Cyrus agreed, bemused. He saw there were also some berries 	in the bowl, purple, orange, green, black and blue. So he took a 	blue berry, though it looked rather sad. "I am curious. Is 	there some set protocol about which wife attends the Good Magician? 	I know you have to take turns, but who decides who is when?"

	"We 	got together and voted on the order," Sofia said. "We 	wives get along well when we meet each other. We have a common 	complaint."

	"Complaint?"

	"Himself."

	Oh. 	"I thought maybe it depended on the type of visitors 	anticipated."

	"Not 	really. Well, we had to swap out once, when the Gorgon got annoyed. 	A querent had the talent of making mirrors appear. He flashed one in 	her face, thinking it would make her stone herself. It didn't, but 	she was so annoyed by the trick that she was ready to remove her 	veil and stone him. The 	Maiden Taiwan had to advance her schedule and finish the Gorgon's 	stint."

	Cyrus 	smiled. "I appreciate the Gorgon's position. It was a dirty 	trick. I wonder what it would be like if all the wives somehow 	showed up together?"

	Sofia 	laughed. "Chaos! Someone should write a story about that. It 	would amuse all of us no end."

	Wira 	returned. "The Good Magician will see you now."

	Cyrus 	followed her through gloomy passages and up a narrow circular flight 	of stone stairs. They came to a small room packed with books. A 	gnomishly small man sat on a high stool poring over a huge open 	tome. Tliis was the fabled Good Magician.

	"Father, 	this is Cyrus Cyborg, the querent," Wira said.

	"Grumph."

	"I 	need to know my true desire,'' Cyrus said nervously. "My 	parents differ on what I should do, and—" He stopped, 	realizing that he had just asked the wrong question. Could he take 	it back? He really wanted to know whether there was any cyborg woman 	he might marry. "That is—"

	"You 	will be the master of thespians," Humfrey said.

	This 	took Cyrus totally by surprise. "Actors?"

	"Your 	desire is to become a playwright and direct your plays. You will 	form a troupe and do that. The Designated Wife, what's her name—"

	"Sofia," 	Wira filled in.

	"Will 	fill you in on your Service." The tired old eyes returned to 	the book. Cyrus had been answered and dismissed.

	He 	had the Answer to the wrong Question.

	The 	weird thing was that it was a good answer. Suddenly he knew that 	this was indeed his desire. To be creative in a literary manner To 	write and produce plays. Somehow he had never thought of it before. 	The Good Magician had known.

	But 	what would he do for a wife? He needed someone to truly undeistand 	and support him. Had he just doomed himself to become a successful 	bachelor playwright? Happy on the outside, lonely on the inside?

	"Thank 	you," he said belatedly as Wira guided him away from the study.

	"That 	wasn't the Question I had expected you to ask," Wira said as 	they walked.

	"My 	mind got garbled," he admitted.

	"Actually 	I think it was a better Question. You should be able to find a 	suitable woman on your own."

	"If 	I only knew how," he said ruefully.

	She 	laughed. "I can tell you that. Merely make a general 	announcement that you are interested in a relationship provided you 	find a suitable woman. Women will flock to demonstrate their 	suitability. Select the best one."

	"I 	can't believe it's that easy."

	"Actually 	it's easier She will 	select you. Naturally 	she will pretend that you did the selecting."

	"Naturally," 	he echoed weakly.

	"Don't 	let on that I told you. It might be considered a violation of the 	Female Conspiracy."

	'There's 	a Female Conspiracy?"

	"Oops; 	men aren't supposed to know about that. About how we actually govern 	them. Don't tell."

	"I 	won't," he agreed weakly. But his private respect for women was 	increasing significantly. He had seen the way his mother governed 	his father, but had assumed that was because she was barbarian and 	as a robot he lacked imagination. Evidently it was more than that.

	Back 	in the sock-sorting chamber he confessed his amazement to Sofia. "He 	gave me my Answer, a better one than I perhaps deserved, and I will 	perform my Service. But it's hard to see how I qualify for the 	mission you have described,"

	"The 	Challenges took care of that," Sofia said matter-of-factly. She 	was a very matter-of-fact woman, just as Wira was a very 	understanding one. "You would never have gotten through had you 	not been qualified."

	"But 	they consisted of seemingly random elements such as a knuckle 	sandwich, a Tuff guy, and a Strip Tide."

	"Disparate 	elements," she agreed. "A good play director may have to 	understand and assemble similar elements to make his production 	work."

	"Oh." 	She was right. "Then I had to identify opposing ants. How does 	that iielate to a play production?"

	"Identifying 	individuals by their salient qualities, so as to fairly understand 	their capacities. This is necessary for proper casting in roles."

	He 	nodded. "So it is. And maybe I will have to relate at some 	point to ants. But the third Challenge had a nasty dust devil I had 	to squelch. I don't see how that relates."

	"You 	will be dealing with actors," she said. "Creative, 	sensitive, emotive types who need to be carefully managed. Some will 	be obnoxious, especially when they don't get the lead roles they are 	sure they deserve. You will need to handle them, politely if 	possible, impolitely if necessary. Just as you handled Dusti, Who 	was, incidentally, playing a role herself; she's actually a nice 	person, for a devil."

	Again 	she was right, "How it is that a smart woman like you is 	satisfied doing a menial chore like sorting socks?"

	"I 	am good at it, and I love the magic ambiance, even though I have no 	magic of my own. There's something about Xanth that makes me glad to 	be here .' '

	"And 	we are glad to have you here. Sofia." Wira said. "And not 	just because of the socks. You handle Magician Humfrey as 	competently as you do the socks ."

	"Well, 	they are two of a kind, socks and men," Sofia said, putting 	together two matching stockings. "All it requires is sufficient 	socks appeal."

	Truly. 	Cyrus thought, women did manage men. "Maybe you could help me 	with something else, before we return to business. I am at best an 	ordinary person, only imperfectly human or machine. Yet full-human 	women seem to be attracted to me. Even part-human, like the witch 	and the dust devil. Why should this be? I am in doubt that most 	women are so foolish as to be guided only by apfwarance."

	"It 	is similar to my situation," Sofia said. "The ambiance 	governs. They knew through some subtle foresight that you were about 	to become a play producer All women want to be actresses, could they 	but confess it to themselves."

	"All 	women are actresses," 	Wira said.

	Sofia 	nodded. "Of course. They were playing up to you in the hope 	that you would cast them in nice roles."

	"That 	must be it." he agreed. "But as yet I have no plays to 	cast anyone in, let alone a bevy of young women."

	"So 	you will write plays to make suitable parts for them. Then you will 	be properly armed."

	"I 	will," he said, amazed anew, "I am already getting ideas, 	thanks to your insights. But how can doing this enable me to be 	summoned by Ragna Roc?"

	"This 	is the real challenge." Sofia said. "You must write and 	produce plays so interesting and entertaining that audiences will 	throng to see them. In time Ragna will learn about it, and want to 	see them for himself. He will summon you and your troupe for a 	command performance."

	"And 	the Three Princesses will be part of the troupe," Cyrus said, 	seeing it.

	"Exactly, 	Of course the Princesses will be in disguise. You will treat them 	exactly as ordinary girls. Which, really they are, apart from their 	power No one must catch on to their identity as Sorceresses."

	"I 	don't know how it can be concealed. The moment they do real magic—"

	"They 	will weave an ambient spell to conceal their nature, and an aversion 	spell to make others incurious about them. But you will know, and 	help mask them, in the event one forgets and lets go with a spell. 	They are after all children, apt to be impulsive. You will be the 	responsible adult."

	"That's 	ironic." Cyrus said. "And I don't mean to pun on my metal 	skeleton. I am only two years old myself."

	"But 	crafted as a twenty-year-old adult. Your memories and responses are 	adult, even though you were never a child."

	"I 	am adult," he agreed. "I will treat them as children. But 	I'll never forget that they are Sorceresses."

	"That 	is sensible. If there is one person you never want to truly annoy, 	it is a Sorceress. A woman scorned is trouble, and a Sorceress 	scorned is downright dangerous."

	"But 	neither can you afford to treat them with undue respect," Wira 	said. "Lest you give away their nature."

	"I 	feel unqualified."

	"The 	Challenges showed you had the necessary qualities," Sofia said. 	"You will handle it."

	"I 	hope so. Still, the larger mission is daunting. I wish I had some 	guidelines."

	"There 	is a guideline," Wira said, "Magician Humfrey told me. It 	is Two to the Fifth .' '

	"Two 	to the Fifth? I am not making much sense of that. What does it 	mean?"

	"We 	don't know," Sofia said, "Himself's pronouncements tend to 	be obscure. Sometime I wonder whether he knows their meaning 	himself. But they are invariably relevant."

	"You 	will simply have to figure it out," Wira said.

	"I 	am at a loss. Two perhaps I can understand. Could that mean that 	there will be two main characters in this play, I mean mission? 	Myself and another?"

	"Maybe 	yourself and your woman," Sofia said. "The right woman can 	make a man."

	"And 	the wrong one can break him," Wira said,

	"So 	I had better be sure the right one selects me."

	Both 	women nodded.

	"Bui 	what about the Fifth?" he asked. "If we have two, must 	they go to find a fifth person? Who would that be?"

	"We 	don't know," Sofia said. "But presumably you are the one 	equipped to figure it out."

	"Maybe 	if I find the right woman, or she finds me. she'll be able to fathom 	it."

	"There 	is that hope," Sofia agreed, "We have done what we can. 	Probably your best course will be to write a play, then go out to 	recruit players for it. In the course of that recruitment you can 	pass by Castle Roogna, where you will pick up the Three Princesses."

	"But 	wouldn't that make their identity obvious? I should not go near 	Castle Roogna."

	"Oh! 	You are correct. The Princesses will have to join you elsewhere, 	somewhere along the way. They will surely find you."

	"Just 	so long as they do so before Ragna Roc summons my troupe."

	'They 	surely will." she agreed. "I have prepared a private room 	for you where you can rest."

	"That 	is sensible. If there is one person you never want to truly annoy, 	it is a Sorceress. A woman scorned is trouble, and a Sorceress 	scorned is downright dangerous."

	"But 	neither can you afford to treat them with undue respect," Wira 	said. "Lest you give away their nature."

	"I 	feel unqualified."

	"The 	Challenges showed you had the necessary qualities," Sofia said. 	"You will handle it."

	"I 	hope so. Still, the larger mission is daunting. I wish I had some 	guidelines."

	"There 	is a guideline," Wira said, "Magician Humfrey told me. It 	is Two to the Fifth .' '

	"Two 	to the Fifth? I am not making much sense of that. What does it 	mean?"

	"We 	don't know," Sofia said, "Himself's pronouncements tend to 	be obscure. Sometime I wonder whether he knows their meaning 	himself. But they are invariably relevant."

	"You 	will simply have to figure it out," Wira said.

	"I 	am at a loss. Two perhaps I can understand. Could that mean that 	there will be two main characters in this play, I mean mission? 	Myself and another?"

	"Maybe 	yourself and your woman," Sofia said. "The right woman can 	make a man."

	"And 	the wrong one can break him," Wira said,

	"So 	I had better be sure the right one selects me."

	Both 	women nodded.

	"Bui 	what about the Fifth?" he asked. "If we have two, must 	they go to find a fifth person? Who would that be?"

	"We 	don't know," Sofia said. "But presumably you are the one 	equipped to figure it out."

	"Maybe 	if I find the right woman, or she finds me. she'll be able to fathom 	it."

	"There 	is that hope," Sofia agreed, "We have done what we can. 	Probably your best course will be to write a play, then go out to 	recruit players for it. In the course of that recruitment you can 	pass by Castle Roogna, where you will pick up the Three Princesses."

	"But 	wouldn't that make their identity obvious? I should not go near 	Castle Roogna."

	"Oh! 	You are correct. The Princesses will have to join you elsewhere, 	somewhere along the way. They will surely find you."

	"Just 	so long as they do so before Ragna Roc summons my troupe."

	'They 	surely will." she agreed. "I have prepared a private room 	for you where you can work on the play. You can join us for meals, 	and there's a serviceable chamber pot under the bed. Will you be 	needing anything else?"

	"Inspiration," 	he said grimly,

	'That 	should seek you out when you are ready."

	Wira 	guided him up the winding stars, past the Good Magician's cramped 	study, and to an isolated turret. A single small window peeked out 	at the sunlight, which spilled in to touch the floor in one spot. 	This was his creative retreat.

	"Lunch 	is in half an hour, in the dining room," Wira said. "Just 	come down to the ground floor and follow your nose. We'll all be 	there."

	"All?"

	"All 	except Magician Humfrey. I serve him in his study so he won't miss a 	line of his tome. The people currently doing their Services. You met 	them on your way in."

	"Oh."

	"And 	my husband Hugo. I wouldn't be here without him."

	"Oh," 	he repeated dully. "Of course." Then, as she was about to 	depart: "What's it like, being married?"

	"It's 	wonderful," she said dreamily. "There's always someone to 	hug." Then she was gone.

	The 	chamber had a bed. and sure enough there was a ceramic pot under it. 	Also a basin and sponge, and a pitcher of water. He would be able to 	wash readily enough.

	In 	a nook of the main room there was a small table and chair, with a 	quill pen, a bottle of ink, and a blank scroll. All he needed to 	write his flrst play.

	He 	sat down at the table and lifted the pen. His mind went utterly 	blank. So much for inspiration; it wasn't seeking him yet. He did 	want to write; he just didn't know how to begin.

	He 	got up and went to the window. He peered out. There was the moat, 	and the countryside surrounding the castle. No inspiration there 	either.

	He 	spied a door, and opened it. It was a closet, with a change of 	clothing. Including a nice clean pair of socks, of course.

	He 	lay on the bed and closed his eyes, trying to imagine a suitable 	play. But all he could think of was how much nicer it would be to 	share the bed with a woman. Any woman. Maybe one like Tess. who was 	so clearly competent to educate him in the appropriate manner. When 	he had embraced her bare body in the pool—

	He 	woke to find sunlight in his face. Time must have passed, allowing 	the sunbeam to move across the room. He jumped up. Was he too late 	for lunch?

	He 	went down the winding stairs to the ground floor, where Wira 	intercepted him. "Just in time," she said. "This 	way." She led him to a new room.

	There 	was a small group of people seated around a square table. Cyrus 	recognized them: Tuff Stuff, Aero Nymph, Dusti Devil, Sofia, and an 	unremarkable man who must have been Hugo, Wira's husband. "Hello," 	Cyrus said.

	"Hello," 	they chorused in return.

	The 	Sand Witch appeared with a platter of sandwiches. She was wearing 	her luscious young form. "Sorry, no more knucklers," she 	said. "They're reserved for Challenges." She leaned down 	to set them on the center of the table, showing rather more flesh 	than strictly necessary, and sat down herself.

	He 	had thought of being in bed with someone like Tess. Now he realized 	that the Witch would also do. Of course she wasn't really 	interested; she had merely been playing a role in the Challenge,

	The 	others reached for the sandwiches closest to them, so Cyrus did too. 	His turned out to be hamhand on ryeder, his favorite kind. 	The others looked similarly satisfied with 	theirs. It seemed the witch knew her business. There were also cups 	of boot rear for a beverage.

	"Did 	you finish your play?" Dusti inquired, sipping some boot and 	bouncing in place as it scored. That caused her decolletage to 	ripple intriguingly, surely by coincidence.

	"I 	haven't even started it," he answered sheepishly. "No 	inspiration."

	"Poor 	boy. Maybe I should join you up there. Give you a whirl. I'm sure I 	could inspire you."

	"No 	you don't, tart," the Witch said. "I've got seniority." 	She turned to Cyrus. "I am more mature than I may appear at the 	moment, and thoroughly experienced." She inhaled. Full-figured 	women seemed unusually good at inhaling,

	Cyrus's 	eyeballs had heated when she leaned forward. Now they heated again. 	He felt the steam rising from them. "You seem quite mature to 	me."

	"Oh 	come off it," Aero snapped. "I can do that, and I'm only a 	fraction her age." She tore open her shirt, taking a breath.

	Cyrus's 	eyes congealed in place,

	"Now 	look what you've done," Dusti said. "I'll have the devil 	of a time getting his sight back." 	She dissolved into a whirlwind, hovered over the table, and blocked 	his view of the nymph.

	His 	eyes thawed. But then in the whirling 	funnel he saw another bosom, formed of 	small clouds of dust, darkly inviting. The 	little devil! His eyes locked up again.

	A 	stone plaque came before his face. It was a slab of volcanic rock, 	held there by Tuff, "Thank 	you," he said as his eyes recovered again.

	"Spoilsport," 	Dusti muttered, reforming in her place.

	"Somebody 	has to protect a poor helpless man from you teases," Tuff said.

	"Some 	day one of us will find out just how 	durable your stone is. Stuff," the 	Witch said darkly, taking 	a swig of her boot.

	"Anytime, 	Sandy." Apparently he was calling her bluff.

	The 	Witch aimed a Glance at him, but then caused it to veer harmlessly 	aside. "Perhaps."

	"So 	have you figured out my talent yet, Cyrus?" Aero asked, 	changing the subject.

	"Not 	yet. But I think it has to be related to your name. There must be 	some magic use for acronyms."

	"But 	how can making words from words be magic?"

	His 	mind started focusing. "Perhaps if 	such a derived word had magic properties. For example, if you 	encountered a magically closed door, and there was a sign saying 	'Door's password needed. Closed until then." You might excerpt 	OPEN and it would open."

	"I 	wonder," she said. "It seems far-fetched. Those aren't 	even all first letters."

	"It's 	not my specialty. Maybe you can do it right."

	The 	others were silent, interested. Aero 	pondered. "Let's say I want to lift something magically, like 	this cup." She focused on her almost empty boot rear cup. 	"Under a Plump pillow, UP."

	The 	cup sailed up, slopping out its remaining boot rear,

	"It 	worked!" she exclaimed, thrilled.

	"Try 	it with other letters," Tuff suggested, laying down a small 	tuff stone. "It would be a stronger talent if any letters would 	do."

	"Under 	a plUmP pillow." The stone flew up,

	"Congratulations," 	the Witch said. "I suppose this means you won't be staying here 	any more."

	"You 	just want to get rid of me!"

	"Less 	competition," the Witch agreed, glancing sidelong at Cyrus. 	"Your plump pillows are too effective."

	Aero 	considered. "I'll go when he goes. I want to be in a play."

	"Don't 	we all," Dusti said.

	"So 	one of you wants to go to his room tonight," Tuff said. "Why 	don't you compete for it more aptly? Say, the first one to get to 	his room without using the stairs gets him."

	"I'm 	not agreeing to that," Cyrus protested, appalled.

	"Who 	asked you?" Dusti asked. "This is our deal." The 	other two nodded.

	Cyrus 	remembered about how some woman would select him. Maybe it was best 	just to let it happen. They were all interesting women. So he 	stifled any further comment,

	"Very 	well," the Witch said. "I can fly my broom. Dusti can 	whirl through air. Now Aero can craft a word to fly or conjure her 	way there. Let's meet outside, and Tuff can give us a starting 	signal. Are we agreed?"

	"What 	about the losers?" Dusti asked.

	"They 	compete again for Tuff."

	"Hey!" 	Tuff said.

	"You 	devised the contest," the Witch informed him. "You're 	overdue for a comeuppance ."

	"One 	of us will melt your stone," Dusti said. "We were just 	waiting for the right pretext."

	Tuff 	looked as uncertain as Cyrus felt, but he seemed to be stuck for it. 	The giris were showing their hand. Or whatever Cyrus had had no idea 	that women could be like this, but he realized that it was just as 	well he was finding out. It put him on guard, for whatever that was 	worth.

	He 	retired lo his room and waited for what was to be. Which woman would 	win? Did he care? One part of him loved being the object of such 	attention, even if he knew it was just because they wanted to 	convince him to cast them in a play.

	He 	looked out the window. There they were on the pavement just within 	the moat: three women and one man. Tuff raised one arm, then brought 	it abruptly down.

	They 	were off. The Witch jumped on her broom and started flying, but it 	was slow; evidently the angle was too steep for it to handle. She 	had to start looping around an ascending spiral, slowly. The dust 	devil became a whirlwind, rising somewhat faster, but 	having trouble with nearby foliage that 	interfered with the circulation. And Aero stood in place, 	concentrating on her mental exercise. It would take her longer to 	start, but she might be much faster once she got it.

	The 	broom and dust devil collided, probably by accident. The Witch 	dropped to the ground, cursing bleepishly, while the whirlwind went 	to pieces and had to reform. Both had lost time.

	They 	got it together again. This time the broom flew to one side, and the 	whirlwind to the other. Aero still stood there, focusing.

	Cyrus 	watched as the Witch gained elevation, achieving the height of his 	window. She was struggling with the effort of maneuvering her broom, 	her long hair flying back, her bosom heaving, her skirt fluttering 	up to flash her nicely formed legs. He found her quite intriguing, 	even if she was older than she looked, and half hoped she would be 	the winner After all, he needed a woman with experience, so she 	would know exactly what to do.

	Then 	he looked at the swirling dust devil, and thought about how 	evocative and shapely Dusti was in her solid form. She was 	interesting too, and spirited, and he would not at all mind if she 	won. She was young, but probably had more than half a notion what to 	do.

	Meanwhile 	Aero remained on the ground, working on her words and letters. She 	intrigued him most of all, maybe because she had shown him the most 	flesh. She had freaked him out. If he had a choice, he would choose 	her. To bleep with experience.

	The 	Witch oriented her broom and sailed toward him. But the dust devil 	was closing fast. They would arrive almost together.

	Just 	as they did. Aero got her spell together and appeared right between 	them, grabbing for the window ledge. The three collided in a tangle 	of limbs, tresses, and screams. They fell down. Aero grabbing the 	end of the broom for support, as the Witch spun in the whirlwind.

	There 	was a splash as they all landed in the moat. "Your fault!" 	"Yours!" "Both of yours!" They were all as mad 	as wet poultry.

	Cyrus 	sighed. It seemed that none of them had won. Now he had no choice 	but to return to his writing. Which wasn't happening.





	Chapter 4: Writer's Block


	Finally 	Cyrus went to Wira, who was helping Sofia put away armfuls of balled 	socks. "I'm supposed to be writing my first play, but my mind 	is utterly blank. I don't know what to do.' '

	"I 	think I've heard of it," Wira said. "It's called Writer's 	Brick. Something like that."

	"Block," 	Sofia said, "Writer's Block. It's a mundane phenomenon,"

	"But 	I'm not Mundane."

	"True." 	She considered, "The specialists in plays are the Curse Fiends, 	You should go to them. They'll know what to do."

	"But 	they'll curse me."

	"I 	doubt it. They are seriously interested in all facets of play 	production. Go ask them for help. They'll be flattered, and will 	surely provide it."

	'The 	right approach," he said, catching on.

	Next 	morning he organized to depart. The three women clustered close, 	"What about us?" the Witch demanded. "We want to be 	Actresses."

	"Don't 	you still have your Service to the Good Magician to complete? There 	will be other querents needing dissuasion."

	"I 	can go," Aero said. "I'm not bound, and I have my Answer, 	thanks to you, Cyrus. I will be happy to reward you for that, come 	nightfall."

	"Unfair!" 	Dusti protested. "We deserve our chances too."

	"The 	Good Magician will let you both go for this," Wira said.

	That 	aroused the Witch's suspicion. "Why?"

	Cyrus 	knew why, but couldn't say it. His real mission was to save Xanth 	from Ragna Roc, and the play was merely the means.

	"I 	can tell you this much," Wira said. "It is important that 	the plays be as good as possible, with the best actors and 	actresses. But there may be danger. So you may go, as part of your 	Services, and completion of the troupe mission will also complete 	your Services. If you care to take the risk."

	"What 	risk?"

	"Possible 	extinction."

	That 	made the three pause. But then they rallied. "I'm in anyway," 	the Witch said. "At least I'll get to be an actress first."

	"Me 	too," Dusti agreed.

	'Then 	you may go," Wira said. "But you may not mention the 	danger. It is a private matter that must not be exposed 	prematurely."

	"No 	gossiping?" the Witch asked, disappointed.

	"None."

	"Bleep."

	"Also," 	Cyrus said, "I will be recruiting other actors, according to 	the need of the plays. I can't promise you lead roles."

	"Worse 	yet," Dusti said glumly. "Still, maybe we can persuade 	you. We can take turns sharing your tent. The three of us." She 	glanced at the others to get their agreement.

	"No," 	Wira said firmly. "Such an arrangement would annoy the other 	actresses. Cyrus must not become intimate with any single actress, 	lest it prejudice the project as a whole."

	"Awww," 	all three said together.

	Cyras 	was relieved. Had any of them been sincerely interested in him, he 	would have been interested in return. But he knew they were only 	trying to get preferential treatment. It was better to keep his 	distance from all of them.

	So 	they set out as a party of four, carrying backpacks with spot 	supplies Wira and Sofia had provided.

	Beyond 	the castle Don Donkey and Xina awaited them. "This is Don, my 	wood-burning robot ass," Cyrus said. "These are three 	actresses."

	The 	donkey snorted. "They don't look like much."

	"Neither 	do you, metal butt," the Witch snapped,

	"Have 	you solved my problem?" Xina asked excitedly, her hair 	brightening.

	"Yes. 	I am forming a repertoire company. You may join it and be an 	actress. Once I manage to write a suitable play."

	Xina 	squealed with girlish delight, her hair shifting to blue. 	"Wonderful!" She kissed him.

	"Hey!" 	Aero said.

	"But 	I can't promise you a leading role," Cyrus said.

	Xina 	looked as if she wanted to take back the kiss. "Oh." Her 	hair turned black.

	"I 	told you he couldn't be trusted," Don said. "He's a 	cyborg."

	"I 	have to warn you that there may be danger," Cyrus told Xina.

	'There's 	always danger. I just want to be an actress."

	"Join 	the throng," Aero said.

	"We'd 	better move along," Cyrus said. "I want to reach the curse 	fiends tomorrow."

	"The 	curse fiends!" Xina said, alarmed.

	"He 	said there was danger," the Witch reminded her snidely,

	Xina 	put on a show of resignation, her hair becoming dishwater blond. 	"What must be, must be."

	"She 	is an 	actress," Dusti said.

	"If 	you like that type," Aero said.

	Cyrus 	marched on, and the four women fell in behind him. He could have 	ridden the donkey, but that would have seemed unfair to the women. 	They took turns, all liking the robot despite his taciturn nature.

	The 	path curved to the north east. "We need to go south east," 	Cyrus said. "To Lake Ogre Chobee."

	"Too 	bad," Don said. "We'll have to leave the enchanted path."

	"But 	that will expose us to possible dangers," Aero protested.

	"Duh, 	pseudonymph ." Don said. "You knew it when you signed."

	"Anyone 	who wishes to leave the troupe now may do so," Cyrus said.

	"Oh, 	come off it," the Witch snapped. "We've got a dust devil 	on our side."

	"And 	a robot," Dusti said.

	They 	stepped off the enchanted path. Immediately a big cat 	appeared, the size of a panther, its head 	the shape of the letter A. It licked its angular chops.

	The 	Witch strode forth. "I recognize you. You're an A-cat, So get 	your A out of here." She swung her broom, scoring on the cat's 	rear.

	Surprised 	and dismayed, the cat bounded back into the forest,

	"I 	probably shouldn't have done that," the Witch said.

	"Why 	not?" Xina asked, evidently impressed.

	"Because 	these cats hunt in prides, and each one is worse than the others. 	Worse, a person can abolish only one cat, then is vulnerable to the 	others. We'll have to take turns dealing with them."

	Sure 	enough, another big cat bounded into view. This one's face resembled 	the letter B. It snarled at them,

	"My 	turn," Dusti said. She whirled into dust devil form and moved 	toward the cat. "Get your B-hind out of here!" the cloud 	of dust cried, flinging grit at the cat's eyes.

	This 	cat, too, was taken aback. It turned tail and fled.

	"Well 	done," the Witch said. "But there'll be another."

	In 	a moment there was. This one's face resembled the letter C, and it 	seemed to have sharp vision. It stalked them menacingly,

	"My 	turn, I think," Aero said, "If I can work out a word fast 	enough."

	"GO." 	Cyrus suggested.

	"I've 	GOt it," she agreed, "GO!"

	And 	the cat, seeing the magic of it, departed.

	Only 	to be replaced by another, with a D-face that looked as if someone 	had scribbled on it, "This must be mine," Cyrus said.

	"You 	look like a suitable morsel," the D-cat remarked as it 	contemplated him.

	"I'm 	not. I'm a cyborg, with rubbery flesh and metal bones. Not that it 	matters. I'm a play director, and I will cast you into the awfullest 	role imaginable, the one that no other actor will accept." He 	lifted his arms as if about to cast a spell.

	This 	cat was evidently not the smartest. It hesitated. Then as Cyrus 	began his invocation, it bounded away.

	"So 	now who does get stuck with that role?" the Witch asked, 	smiling.

	"The 	stupidest one," he answered.

	But 	in half a moment there was another, an E-cat, with a face like the 	letter E. "Eeeee!" it screamed, charging them.

	Xina 	jumped to intercept it, her hair billowing out in the most sickly 	green imaginable. The cat saw it and screamed again, in revulsion. 	She kept coming, and it finally turned tail and was gone, retching,

	"What 	was that?" Cyrus asked.

	"Ogress 	coif." Her hair was fading back to bearable.

	The 	others laughed. That did explain it.

	"It 	seems to me that talents aren't supposed to be repeated," Aero 	said. "I once met a girl who could change her hair color."

	Cyrus 	sifted through his memory. "Talents don't generally repeat, 	except in the case of the Curse Fiends. But some can be very 	similar. Xina probably changes her hair in a different way than the 	other girl did."

	Another 	cat appeared. This one's face was in the form of an ugly letter F.

	"That's 	the worst." the Witch said. "It's from Mundania, where it 	terrorizes students. The F-cat won't allow anyone to pass unless 	he/she answers a silly question. No one with any sense can answer."

	"Then 	it must be my turn," Don said, moving toward the cat. "I'm 	a silly ass." He oriented on the cat. "Avast, you funny 	feline formula."

	The 	F-cat was more than ready. "If one dragon smokes from the east 	at three strides per moment, and another steams from the west at 	four bounds per trice, what will the temperature of the fire dragon 	be when they collide?"

	"This 	is nonsense," Cyrus muttered. "A smoker and a steamer have 	nothing to do with a fire breather."

	"That's 	the nature of the beast," the Witch said. "Normal folk 	can't even understand its questions."

	"Four 	fifty-one Fahrenheit." Don said.

	The 	dragon's jaw dropped. "You answered it!" it said, 	dismayed.

	"Now 	get your tail out of here." Don said.

	The 	F-cat did, and no more cats appeared. Apparently this party was too 	tough for them to prey on.

	"How 	did you know the answer?" the Witch asked, impressed.

	"It's 	one of the useless facts stored in my data bank," Don said.

	"But 	suppose the cat had asked a different question?"

	"All 	the F-cat questions are stored there. It's a real memory dump."

	"We 	had better move on," Cyrus said. But privately he was impressed 	with all of them; each member of the party had come through when 	needed.

	They 	found an enchanted path leading toward Lake Ogre-Chobee and followed 	it. By evening they were well on their way. They came to a camping 	site where there was fresh water, pie trees, and a cabin for five.

	"But 	we are a party of six," the Witch said.

	"I'll 	sleep outside," Don said. "Actually I don't really sleep; 	I merely power down my limited cranial circuits to let them cool, 	I'm about due to forage for more wood anyway."

	"Five," 	Aero said. "We'll just fit."

	Cyrus 	became alarmed. "I don't think I should join you."

	"You'd 	better join 	us," the Witch said. "Otherwise one of us will sneak out 	to seduce you without the others knowing until it's too late."

	"Now 	who would do a thing like that?" Xina asked innocently,

	"Who 	wouldn't?" the Witch retorted.

	Xina's 	hair went limp. She knew the Witch was right.

	The 	women organized things effectively, and they had a nice supper of 	pot pies and tsoda pop. They let Cyrus wash up in the pond first, 	alone, then shut him in the cabin while the rest of them washed with 	much laughing and screaming.

	At 	last they rejoined him, "We have decided that it's not fair to 	leave you completely alone," the Witch said. "So we'll 	take turns sharing your bed."

	"Fair?" 	he asked, alarmed, "What's fair about that?"

	"Fair 	to us" Dusti 	said. "Each one gets equal cuddling rights."

	"Cuddling?"

	"That's 	all that's allowed," Aero said. "Unfortunately. But we'll 	just have to make do."

	"I'm 	not sure I—"

	"Just 	lie down in the center bed and sleep," Xina said, "We've 	worked it all out."

	Bemused, 	Cyrus lay down and closed his eyes. Immediately someone joined him 	on the bed. He tried to ignore her, but she slid a hand into his 	shirt and nuzzled his neck.

	Her 	female nearness was intoxicating. He felt guiltily urgent to do what 	he shouldn't do and probably would flub anyway. "Who are you?" 	he whispered.

	"Guess," 	she whispered back.

	Because 	it was a whisper, he couldn't recognize the voice. "Will you 	answer a question?"

	"No. 	I will merely whisper sweet nothings in your ear." She touched 	his ear with her lips, "Sweet nothings!"

	The 	worst of it was that the nonsense words really turned him on. She 	was playing with him, and he was powerless to stop it.

	He 	focused on business. So he couldn't fathom her identity by her 	answers. What else was there? "Then I'll have to feel you."

	"Feel 	me," she agreed eagerly.

	He 	put a hand to her head. She had hair, but he didn't know what any of 	their hair felt like, so that didn't help. He needed to see its 	color. He felt her face, but found that he could not tell one girl's 	face from another without seeing it. He felt for her clothing, but 	she wore none. All her identifiers were missing. "I give up," 	he said.

	"The 	bleep you do! You haven't felt most of me."

	"But 	that would be too—too familiar."

	"Not 	when you have reason. Feel." She took his hand and set it on 	her chest. It was some chest.

	He 	freaked out. He lay there with his whole body locked in paralysis, 	unable to move a muscle or anything else.

	"Foul!" 	another woman cried. "You freak him out, you lose your turn. 	That's the rule."

	"Bleep." 	She removed his hand and left the bed.

	By 	the time Cyrus recovered control of his body, it was too late to ask 	who she had been. But her last "bleep" had been voiced, 	and that gave him the clue: Dusti, She was better endowed than he 	had thought, at least with her clothes off. If he had thought to 	feel her forehead he would have found her little horns and known her 	that way. She was truly a little devil.

	Now 	there was another beside him. "Hello, Cyrus," she 	murmured, nibbling on his left ear,

	"Xina," 	he said.

	"You 	bet. Now let's see if I can prevent you from freaking out. Put on 	this glove."

	"Glove?"

	"Here." 	She titled it to his hand, then found his other hand for the other 	glove. "Now touch my body."

	"But—"

	"Here." 	She carried one hand to her chest. He felt one or two marvelously 	soft mounds.

	He 	reeled, but did not quite freak out. The gloves prevented direct 	contact, and that was enough. But it left him with deliciously 	naughty thoughts. "You—nice," he said.

	"To 	be sure. Remember that when you cast the lead lady role."

	"But 	that's supposed to be according to acting merit."

	"Merit, 	smerit. It goes to the most evocative 	body. Do you have a problem with that?"

	"Well, 	as I understand 	it—"

	She 	guided his gloved hand across truly evocative surfaces. He was right 	at the very veiTge of freakdom, but not quite. 	"Are you sure?"

	He 	was overwhelmed, "No problem," he agreed.

	"Bleep!" 	someone else muttered.

	"She 	used a prop," Dusti protested, "That's against the rule."

	"So 	it is," the Witch agreed. "I had forgotten. We have to 	take the gloves 	off. Out of there, wench. You're disqualified."

	"BLEEP!" 	Xina swore in wenchly fashion.

	Now 	it was Acro's turn. She wore a sleek nightie that masked her body 	without the need for gloves. "And whose is the most evocative 	body?" she inquired dulcetly and she pressed it against him, 	placing his hands on her derriere.

	Again, 	he was just barely (so to speak) shy of a freak. "Yours," 	he gasped.

	She 	kissed his cheek. "That's good."

	His 	face heated with the imprint of her lips. 	"Th-thank you."

	Then 	she kissed his mouth. He started sliding 	into a freak. "Oops! Must stop that. 	You've got to be immune to kisses. Kindly 	Stay Serene equals KISS. That should do it."

	"It 	did," he agreed, no longer freaking. "Kiss me again."

	"Foul!" 	Dusti exclaimed. "No magic!"

	"Right," 	the Witch agreed, "That spell disqualifies you. Get your soft 	round butt out of there, nymph."

	"Dam, 	I forgot," Aero said, doing it.

	That 	left the Witch. "I knew those inexperienced girls would mess 	up," she confided. "The trick is to rev up a man just so 	far. and no farther."

	"Doesn't 	he have a choice?"

	She 	laughed, "I love your naivete." She settled down against 	him, revving him up just so far, "Sleep well."

	And, 	to his surprise, he did.

	Cyrus 	scouted the way ahead, riding Don, to be sure of a route that all 	the actresses could handle without mischief. It was boring work, but 	necessary. "Too bad we can't be doing something interesting, 	like rescuing damsels in distress," he said.

	"Or 	kicking some ass." Don agreed.

	"I 	wouldn't do that to an animal!"

	"I 	was not referring to an animal."

	Oh. 	They moved on. He heard a scuffling and clamor, and hurried to 	investigate.

	A 	 comely young woman was being hounded by three brutish thugs. "No! 	Never!" she cried.

	"Yes, 	and right now," a thug retorted, grabbing her by her long hair. 	"All three of us."

	Cyrus 	 realized that this was a maiden in need of rescue. Maybe 	even a Damsel in Distress, He hurried closer.

	"I'll 	scream!" she threatened.

	The 	thug pinned her against a tree trunk. "You're a real piece of 	resistance, know that?"

	"That's 	pikre de resistance," Cyrus called, pronouncing it correctly. 	It was in his memory bank. "The main event. And not for you. 	Let her go."

	"And 	sup|K)se we don't?" the thug demanded belligerently.

	'Then 	I will have to force the issue."

	"Har 	har har!" The thug reached out to rip open the damsel's bodice.

	Cyrus 	realized that these thugs were not going to be reasonable. He 	dismounted and strode forward. Don moved to block off the other two 	thugs.

	"What 	the bleep?" the thug demanded as Cyrus caught his arm. "I'll 	pulverize you!"

	Cyrus 	threw the arm into the brush. Since the thug remained attached, he 	followed it, landing on a stink horn. There was a foul-smelling 	noise and an awful-looking stench. The thug was soon enveloped in a 	noxious cloud, choking helplessly.

	Meanwhile 	Don was kicking ass, his way. One hind hoof booted the bottom of the 	second thug, and the other hind hoof pasted the posterior of the 	third thug. Both flew through the air to land on their own stink 	horns.

	In 	hardly more than a moment and a half all three stinking thugs were 	fleeing the scene.

	"You 	saved me!" the Damsel exclaimed gratefully. "However can I 	reward you, handsome stranger?"

	"Oh, 	there's no need. We were just passing by.'

	She 	glanced at him thoughtfully. Her ponytail flicked off a stray fly 	from her shoulder. "At least let's get to know each other I am 	Algebra, good at math because I wear a bra made of algae," She 	glanced down at it, now exposed by the thug's bodice rip. It was 	somewhat green and furry, but supported very nice mounds. "I am 	a nymph with some equine ancestry." Her ponytail flicked off 	another fly.

	"I 	am Cyrus Cyborg, a playwright, on my way to see the Curse Fiends."

	"A 	playwright! Oh, I always wanted to be an actress!" Then she 	reconsidered. "But that doesn't compute. My real passion is 	mathematics. I must not be diverted from it. What is a cyborg?"

	"I 	am half human, half machine."

	"That's 	why you're so strong! And handsome too." She glanced at him 	again, taking a deep breath that stretched the living bra. "Are 	you sure I can't reward you with a kiss and perhaps more? I am 	really in your debt for rescuing me from those thuggees."

	Cyrus 	was getting half a glimmer what she offered. But it would surely 	delay him unduly, "No thank you. I have to be moving on."

	"Then 	maybe you will accept this. It is exactly what you will need." 	She reached into the crevice between her full mounds and brought out 	a tiny vial. "Three drops of lethe elixir. It will 	make you forget something for three days."

	"No 	thank you. I don't need to forget anything."

	"Not 	now, maybe. But some time you will need this. It's a mathematical 	certainty. Please, it's the only way I can repay you for saving me."

	When 	she put it that way, it was difficult to decline. "Thank you, 	Algebra," he said, accepting the vial and putting it in his 	shirt pocket,

	"You 	are more than welcome, Cyrus." Then she laced her bodice back 	together and departed.

	"You're 	a fool," Don remarked as they resumed their trek, "She was 	eager to make you deliriously happy for a calculated instant or 	two."

	"I 	guess it's my nature," Cyrus agreed. "I don't really know 	how to handle women."

	In 	due course they reached Lake Ogre-Chobee, where ogres and chobees 	roamed. As it happened, there was a middle-aged curse fiend standing 	by the shore, "Cyrus Cyborg, I presume?" he asked. "I 	am Curtis Curse Friend,"

	Cyrus 	was astonished. "You expected me?"

	"Indubitably. 	We have an interest in those who set up competing play troupes."

	That 	had not occurred to him. "I did not realize that it was 	competitive. I merely want to realize my destiny of writing and 	presenting plays."

	"Precisely. 	And you are having a problem getting started."

	"Yes. 	I am told I have Writer's Block, and that you would know how to deal 	with it."

	Curtis 	laughed. "Indeed we do. But you have it garbled. In Mundania 	they have little or no magic, so their blocks get in their way and 	they have to dispose of them. But in Xanth they are magic, and every 	writer needs his own special one."

	"I 	need a block?"

	"Yes. 	Not just any block; the one block that is right for you. With it you 	will be able to write; without it you will be bereft of output, as 	you are now."

	"Suppose 	I get the wrong block?"

	"Then 	you will be no better off than the Mundanes. The wrong block will 	constantly thwart your efforts."

	"How 	can I get the right block?"

	"You 	will have to find it. You will know it when you see it. and it will 	know you."

	"How 	do I find it?"

	"That 	is what I am here for. I will produce your plays. That includes 	signing on your actors, arranging your travel schedule, organizing 	meals, and anything else the troupe requires. Getting you in fit 	condition to write and cast your plays is an aspect of it."

	This 	was too much for Cyrus. "Why should you join my troupe? We are 	not curse fiends."

	"Curse 	friends," Curtis corrected him gently. "We are hardly 	fiends. We are human beings with a common magic talent of cursing, 	and a common ability to produce fine plays."

	"Curse 	friends," Cyrus agreed. "But still I don't quite 	understand—"

	Don 	had been standing by. Now he spoke. "What's in it for you? We 	must beware of fiends bearing gifts."

	"A 	talking ass!" Curtis exclaimed. "The first four-footed one 	I have encountered.' "

	"He 	is Don Donkey, my robot steed," Cyrus said.

	"I 	will answer forthrightly," Curtis said. "I have spent 	twenty years mastering my craft, rising through the ranks from 	spectator, through actor, to producer. Now I am ambitious to become 	Chief Producer, as there is an opening. To do that I must prove 	myself capable of managing the least likely material and producing a 	reputable play. If I can accomplish this with your motley untrained 	troupe, to the satisfaction of my peers, I will achieve the office."

	Cyrus 	exchanged a look with Don. That was almost too candid. "You can 	help me find my block?"

	"And 	organize your troupe, I mean to enable you to put on outstanding 	plays, thus demonstrating my genius for my peers."

	Don 	opened his mouth. Cyrus quickly used his two hands to close it, 	"Thank you. We appreciate your sacrifice."

	Curtis 	nodded. "Naturally. Now your physical block will be found 	anywhere, or you can craft it yourself."

	"I 	don't understand."

	Curtis 	rolled his eyes expressively. The orbs were evidently trying to 	avoid gazing on idiots. "Find a chunk of wood. Carve it into a 	block. Then I will explain how to establish the necessary rapport. 	Meanwhile I will set about organizing your troupe." Curtis 	walked toward the waiting women.

	"So 	now you know where you stand," Don said,

	"Knee 	high to a hopper," he agreed. "Well, let's get on it. The 	man seems to know what he's doing."

	They 	checked around, and soon found a thick old gnarly wood root. Cyrus 	fetched a carving knife from Don's tool chest and carved. The wood 	was exceedingly solid and hard, but in due course he had a crude 	block. He used a rasp to work off the splinters, then sanded it and 	held it up. It was actually rather pretty, now that its grain was 	showing. "I have my block," he said, "I hope."

	"Just 	don't let anybody knock it off."

	Curtis 	appeared just as he finished. The man seemed to have an impeccable 	sense of timing. "Good enough. Now you need to make contact 	with the spirit of the block in the dream realm. There's a gourd 	down that path." He gestured. "Have your donkey supervise 	while you enter the scene. Keep your hands on the block so the gourd 	can orient. They will surely be expecting you."

	Cyrus 	sifted through his memory bank. The gourd was an avenue to the dream 	realm, A person put his eye to the peephole and found himself there, 	but could not escape it until someone cut off his line of sight to 	the peephole. That was why Don was needed.

	They 	followed the path, and soon found the access. It was a perfectly 	ordinary green gourd growing on a leafy vine. It was hard to believe 	that such a routine thing could perform in such manner. But there 	were many examples in his memory.

	He 	lay down by the gourd, holding firmly on to the block. "Cut off 	my line of sight in one hour," he told Don. "Don't 	forget."

	"As 	long as one of those lithesome nymphs doesn't come to ride me away."

	"Don!"

	The 	robot snorted, "It was asinine humor,"

	'That 	figures."

	Cyrus 	put his eye to the peephole in the end of the gourd. Suddenly he was 	in another realm. It was some sort of city block, and before him was 	a blockhouse. This did seem to be the place. Curtis had advised him 	correctly. His memory bank did not have reference to any way to 	select a particular scene in the dream realm. The curse friends 	evidently had trade secrets.

	The 	wood block was not in his hands. It seemed it had put him here, but 	could not enter itself. Well, that left his hands free, if that 	mattered.

	He 	walked toward the door in the blockhouse. A voice challenged him: 	"Whatcha looking for, blockhead?" It was a demon guard who 	had just appeared. Across his burly chest was the word buster. 	So he was the blockbuster.

	"My 	personal Writer's Block."

	Buster 	glanced at his empty hands, evidently seeing something there, "This 	is the place. Go on in." The demon faded out.

	Inside 	was a veritable mountain of tumbled bocks. There were hundreds of 	them, of all sizes and colors. How was he to find his one personal 	one?

	Considering 	the hopeless task, he realized that this was in its fashion like a 	Challenge at the Good Magician's Castle. He simply had to figure out 	how to handle it.

	This 	was the dream realm. So maybe a dream would do it.

	He 	closed his eyes and formed a picture in his mind: the somewhat 	nebulous image of the Perfect Block.

	He 	felt a warmness in one direction. He walked that way, and the warmth 	increased. Then he tripped over a block and sprawled on the floor.

	He 	opened his eyes. He was at the verge of another small mountain of 	blocks. There seemed to be a warmth coming from one section of it. 	So he didn't have to do it blind.

	He 	delved into the pile, clearing the way. Blocks tumbled noisily down, 	but he kept going. The warmth was getting almost hot.

	Finally 	he plunged his hand into the mass of blocks, feeling for the warmest 	one. He found it; it was almost too hot to touch. He hauled it out, 	scattering more blocks.

	It 	was a statuette of a lovely young woman. Nude.

	Now 	he became aware of the contours his fingers clasped.

	He 	dropped it, embarrassed.

	"Ouch!" 	the little woman exclaimed angrily, rubbing her pert bottom, "Oaf!"

	"You're 	alive!" he said, astonished,

	"What 	did you expect, moron? A dead fish?"

	"Uh, 	not exactly. I'm looking for my Writer's Block. The one that is 	meant for me alone."

	Her 	eyes rolled in a manner reminiscent of the curse friend's, "I 	see I've got my work cut out for me."

	"You 	mean—you're the one?"

	"I 	am Melete," she said. "MEL-i-tee. The Muse of Meditation. 	It is my sorry chore to develop your inherent ability to write. It 	will help if you don't throw me on the floor."

	"I 	didn't—"

	She 	delivered a withering stare.

	"I 	apologize," he said quickly. "It won't happen again."

	She 	mellowed slightly. "I suppose you can't help being clumsy. 	You're a mortal man."

	"Actually 	I'm only half a man. I'm a cyborg."

	She 	sent another glance, this one apprising. "Well, that's new. A 	cyborg playwright. It does help to have a bit of novelty."

	"You 	said you are a— I get a whole Muse to help me?"

	"You 	get a tiny fragment of a Muse, as every writer does. Only when I 	have enabled all aspiring writers to be fully competent will I 	finally be freed of this miserable bondage. So you will do your 	best, or else."

	"Or 	else what?" he asked, curious.

	"Or 	else I will leave you forever, and you will never achieve your 	stupid dream. Now take me out to the real world. We'll talk further 	there."

	"Yes 	ma'am," he agreed, picking her up carefully by the midsection. 	Whatever he had expected, it wasn't this.

	He 	returned to the entrance, which turned out not to exist. "How 	do I get out?"

	"You 	wait until your companion breaks your eye-line to the peephole," 	she said. "Duh."

	"Oh, 	Of course,"

	And 	suddenly it happened.





	Chapter 5: Melete


	Cyrus 	found himself staring at the donkey's hoof, which had broken the 	line of sight to the peephole, "Thank you." he said. "So 	did you get it?"

	He 	looked at the block between his hands. It remained a block. "I'm 	not sure. I made contact with a—"

	He 	broke off, because the block had changed. Now it was a statuette, or 	half of one. The upper half of the fragment of the Muse, except for 	the arms, which were missing. "Melete!"

	She 	made a moue. "You were expecting Clio?"

	"But 	you're only half there."

	"What 	are you talking about?" Don demanded.

	"It's 	my Writer's Block, animated."

	"Writer's 	bust," Melete corrected him, inhaling.

	"Bust. 	Sorry."

	"What 	did you bust?" Don asked, "Your block? It's unchanged."

	"Look 	closer," Cyrus said, holding up the bust. "Melete, My 	muse."

	"You 	named your block?"

	"She 	named herself. Or identified herself. She's going to help me write 	my plays,"

	'That 	dull block of wood will help you write?"

	"Not 	the wood. Melete, Look at her!"

	Don 	looked closely at the wood, then at him, "Are you suddenly 	tetched in the head, cyborg'.' I told you, that's just wood. Looks 	good enough to eat."

	"Don't 	you dare!" He turned to Melete. 'Tell him."

	She 	shook her head. "It's no use, Cyrus. He can't see or hear me. I 	am your muse, exclusively."

	"Because 	he's a robot?"

	"No 	one but you can appreciate me. To most others I'm just your original 	block of wood. Don't lose it."

	Cyrus 	digested that. "I fashioned the block, you animate it—only 	for me?"

	She 	threw her head back so that her hair flung out. Without arms that 	was her most dramatic gesture, "I believe he's got it!"

	"I 	got it," he agreed. He turned to the donkey. "Let's just 	say I have a good imagination. It is as though this wood takes a 	form and talks to me. But now I should be able to write my plays."

	"Let's 	hope so," Don said, "Otherwise this whole troupe is a 	bust."

	"A 	bust," Melete agreed, laughing. That did more things to her own 	bust.

	That 	reminded him. "Why don't you have arms? You did in the dream 	realm. In fact you had your whole body."

	"Which 	remains there," she agreed. "I am your connection between 	reality and dreams. My better half must remain there until my job is 	done."

	"But 	without arms—"

	"I 	have arms. They just don't show at the moment. I have to choose."

	"Choose?"

	"Which 	portion of me to animate."

	"I 	don't think I understand."

	"Like 	this." She changed, in a weird kind of shifting upward. Her 	head disappeared from the top down, while her belly and hips came 	into view—and beside them, her arms. These continued traveling 	up and disappearing, as her legs appeared. At last there was only a 	nice pair of legs standing on the pedestal that was the lower half 	of the block.

	And 	of course she couldn't talk in this position. They were very nice 	legs; had they had panties he might even have fnsaked out. But they 	were silent,

	"I 	hope you can hear me, Melete," he said. "Please, bring 	your head back. Seeing only your lower half like this makes me 	uncomfortable,"

	The 	shifting reversed. Her feet disappeared into the block while her 	hips reappeared, followed by her belly and arms. For a moment or two 	or three she was a central torso, with bottom, belly, and breasts. 	Then the head came down, and she was back as a bust. "Now you 	know. You can have any part of me, but never the whole of me, except 	in your dreams."

	"I 	see that," he said, impressed and somewhat disquieted. "Maybe 	it's just as well that no one else can see you."

	"I 	am yours alone," she agreed.

	"If 	you're quite through talking to your block," Don said sourly, 	"maybe it's time to get back to the troupe before that curse 	fiend absconds with it."

	"Curse 	friend. They're not actually fiends."

	"All 	in the viewpoint."

	He 	mounted Don, and they headed off to rejoin the troupe. He held the 	bust carefully before him,

	'Tuck 	me in your pocket," Melete said, "I must never leave you, 	because I am your creative spirit."

	"But 	the block is too big for my pocket."

	"Nonsense. 	Do it."

	"If 	you insist." He lifted the block to his shirt pocket—and 	it fit. That had to be magic. Well, Melete was magic, so maybe it 	made sense.

	"It 	does," she said from his pocket.

	"You 	can read my thoughts?"

	"I 	am your 	thoughts. I know everything that's in your mind,"

	"Everything?" 	he asked, alarmed.

	"Everything 	I focus on. I can't help you meditate properly if I don't know your 	distractions. You have a problem with that?"

	"Uh, 	no, I suppose. It's just that you're a—"

	"I'm 	a what?"

	"Nothing," 	he said hastily,

	"I'm 	a woman?"

	"Uh, 	yes. And women are—different."

	"What's 	wrong with being female?"

	"Nothing, 	It's only that—nothing."

	"What 	don't you want me to pick up on?"

	"Nothing."

	"That 	means there's something. You'd better tell me, because if I have to 	ferret it out for myself by delving into your subconscious there's 	no telling what else I'll discover in those murky regions. Folk have 	all kinds of secret shames hidden in the nether realms. Make it 	easier on us both. Formulate your problem specifically."

	He 	seemed to be stuck for it. "Men—women—they think 	about them. It can be embarrassing."

	She 	delved on that, "Oh, those actresses. Why the naughty minxes! 	They're teasing you in bed."

	"Yes," 	he confessed, feeling himself blushing.

	"Well, 	we'll just have to put a stop to that. I'm the only one who can 	tease you now. We can't allow them to distract you from your 	creative writing."

	"But 	I can't stop them. Women govern men."

	'This 	is a special case," she said seriously. "Women govern men 	in secret. The moment it becomes open, it loses effect. They have 	been more than open; they have become blatant. That nullifies their 	advantage."

	"It 	doesn't seem nullified to me. They—get me all excited, and I 	can't do anything about.

	"Precisely. 	You have to assert yourself."

	"I 	wish I could!"

	"You 	can. Here's how: call them together the moment we reach the troupe, 	and announce that you have found your Writer's Block and will now 	concentrate on writing the first play. Especially at night, because 	your dreams are essential. Say that any woman you find in your bed 	you will promptly nail to the mattress."

	"I 	couldn't do that! I don't even have a hammer."

	She 	laughed. "You do now. Trust me. Don't mistake subtlety for 	stupidity, or certainty for judgment. They'll get the message. Just 	make the statement, and they won't call your bluff."

	"But—but 	suppose they do—call my bluff?"

	"Oh, 	you're fun." She shook her head with some private amusement. 	"Then I will teach you how to nail a woman, as it were. One 	demonstration will make the point. But that should not be necessary. 	Henceforth women won't manage you, you will manage women."

	"But 	you're a woman! Why should you betray your own kind?"

	"Because 	I have a higher calling. I have to make a playwright of you. To 	accomplish that, first I have to make a man of you. It's a tall 	order, but I think I can accomplish it, by night if not by day."

	"That's 	good," he said dubiously.

	"I 	wish I knew what you think that block is saying," Don said. 	"Women, hammers, bluffs—I am not making sense of this."

	"You're 	an ass," Melete snapped. But of course the donkey didn't hear 	her.

	"It's 	a private dialogue," Cyrus said.

	"If 	you do it in public, folk will think you are crazy."

	"He's 	got a point," Melete said. "You had better not talk to me 	when in company.' '

	"But 	then how can we have a dialogue?"

	"Merely 	concentrate your thoughts as if you are talking, I will pick them up 	readily enough, and answer you."

	/'// 	try, he 	thought.

	"That's 	the way," she agreed. "You know, you should clean out your 	pocket sometime. You have cookie crumbs and a vial of lethe here."

	A 	nymph gave me that. She said it's just what I'll need, sometime.

	"Well, 	we'll see, sometime,"

	They 	rode along in silence for half a while. Then Cyrus thought of 	something else. "You said I should assert myself. Is that only 	with women?"

	"No, 	it's with everyone. You will become a playwright of note, a man of 	importance. You must act like it."

	"What 	about Curtis Curse Friend? He stepped right in, telling me what to 	do. In fact he directed me to you."

	"I 	know him, I know all the curse friends. I have worked with their 	playwrights many times. Curtis is a good man, with a liability that 	doesn't affect the troupe. Just tell him that Melete is with you 	now. He will know exactly what that means."

	"What 	exactly does it 	mean?"

	"It 	means that if he opposes you, he will have to deal with me. I'm a 	minor Goddess to the curse friends. He will give you no trouble."

	Cyrus's 	doubt remained. "But if he does give me trouble, what then?"

	"Cyrus, 	there are three things never to antagonize, in ascending order: a 	woman, a Sorceress, and a Goddess. You can get away with the first, 	sometimes, if you're careful. The second is real trouble, and the 	third is disaster."

	"Disaster?"

	"Where 	would the curse friends be if they abruptly lost their creativity?"

	'They 	wouldn't be able to make new plays."

	"Or 	present the old ones effectively. They would lose their rationale 	for existence."

	Which 	would be a terrible curse. "You can really do that?"

	"Oh, 	yes. Simply by departing."

	He 	believed it, "Suppose I, somehow, antagonize you?"

	'Then 	you might as well go farm itch ants, because you'll never write 	another play."

	"Oh, 	Melete, I couldn't stand that! How can I make sure never to annoy 	you?"

	"It 	is easy. Never oppose my will."

	"That's 	all?"

	"That's 	enough,"

	"Your 	will is law," he agreed.

	'That's 	an excellent start."

	'Troupe 	ahead," Don said. "So shut up with your block,"

	He 	had foi;gotten to keep it silent. "Right."

	The 	troupe had made a camp. Women were working industriously at various 	tasks, such as setting up tents and digging a U-ench to the side.

	Curtis 	approached as Cyrus dismounted. 'This will be our station while we 	recruit actors and rehearse them for the first play. When we are 	ready, we'll tour, making presentations to the villages on our 	itinerary. I have it all organized."

	"Melete 	is with me."

	The 	man took stock, "Organized by your leave, of course."

	"Of 	course," Cyrus agreed. He had clearly risen from Nobody to 	Somebody. Melete did know what she was doing.

	"Naturally 	I do," she agreed.

	"Do 	you have any directives, Playwright?"

	"Summon 	the women; I have an announcement to make."

	Curtis 	clapped his hands, attracting their attention. "All actresses 	assemble here. The Playwright will address you now."

	The 	women obeyed with alacrity. In a moment and a half the four of them 	stood before him.

	"I 	have found my Writer's Block," Cyprus said. "Hereafter I 	will be concentrating on my writing. By day and night. I want no 	distractions. Any woman I discover in my bed I will promptly nail to 	the mattress. Any questions?"

	"Bleep," 	the Witch muttered. "He's calling our bluff."

	"What's 	that?" he asked sharply.

	"We 	hear and obey. Playwright," she said immediately.

	"Very 	good. Return to your chores."

	They 	returned to their chores. So did Curtis,

	"Dominance 	has been established," Melete said with satisfaction, "Now 	go to your tent and start writing."

	"But 	I should help with the chores," he protested.

	Don 	gave him a hard nudge with his nose.

	"Right. 	Thanks," he said, to both Muse and donkey.

	His 	tent was in the center of the camp, already set up with a bed, 	writing table, and chair. On the table was parchment, a quill, and a 	bottle bearing the label blue bottle, inc 	filled with dark blue ink. Everything he 	needed,

	"Apart 	from me," Melete agreed.

	He 	sat down and lifted the quill. He dipped it in ink. And his mind 	went blank, exactly as before. "Nothing's changed!"

	"Yes 	it has," Melete said, "You just need to organize your 	thoughts as well as Curtis has organized 	the site. Put down the quill and go lie on the bed,"

	"But 	that's not writing!"

	"Are 	you opposing my will?"

	"No!" 	He put down the quill and went to the bed. "Now what?"

	"Close 	your eyes and meditate."

	He 	lay on his back and closed his eyes. "How do I meditate? I've 	never done it before."

	"Just 	think about life, the universe, and the play. What would move an 	audience?"

	"Well, 	a romance, maybe."

	"Boy 	meets girl, boy loses girl, boy regains girl?"

	"Yes. 	I guess. But it doesn't turn me on."

	"Because 	it's unoriginal formula. What would you rather write?"

	"A 	really dramatic story of thwarted love that turns out well by 	surprise."

	"That's 	not formula?"

	He 	pondered. "I guess I want to write my 	formula."

	"Very 	well. Now think of some completely different idea."

	"Well, 	once I thought how nice it would be if I could see emotions. But 	that doesn't relate to this."

	"Yes 	it does. Or it will as you craft it. How can you make it relate?"

	"Maybe 	if he's looking for his perfect woman, by her emotion. He finds 	pretty women, but their feelings are not pretty, so he knows better 	than to mess with them. So he orients on the aura of feeling 	instead. And finds the best one. He can see this lovely cloud around 	her, and knows she's his ideal. But then he sees her body, and she's 	a monster."

	"A 	monster?"

	"She 	has the head of a frog. Something like that."

	"So 	what does he do?"

	"He's 	got a problem."

	"What 	would you do?"

	He 	laughed. "I'd probably take the pretty one with the 	bad.feeling, I'm a typical male fool."

	"Yes. 	Your protagonist should be typical. But then he must emerge as smart 	and decent, so that the average male viewer will identify with him, 	and be satisfied with his progress. The greater challenge will be 	the woman."

	"The 	monster?"

	"How 	can you make her someone the average woman would identify with and 	like?"

	He 	pondered. "Maybe if she was beautiful, but was transformed by 	some evil magician or something. Or a really bad curse. So inside 	she's as beautiful as ever, but outside she's a horror."

	"Exactly, 	Now go out and find your actress."

	"A 	woman with a frog's head?"

	"Or 	equivalent. A woman no man would want, yet who is utterly deserving 	and rather pretty. Make her the star of your play, 'The Curse.' "

	"She's 	cursed, all right."

	"But 	make him the one who is cursed."

	"He 	has a frog's head?"

	"No, 	He can see the auras."

	"But 	that's a blessing, not a curse."

	"And 	if it makes the woman of his dreams unsuitable, because he can see 	by her visible feeling that she is deceiving him and will destroy 	him if he marries her?"

	"Oho! 	The blessing is really a curse."

	"Until 	he converts it to a blessing by using it to locate his true ideal 	woman. Women will appreciate that, and men will also, if she has a 	good body."

	"That's 	cynical."

	"A 	writer must cynically craft a story that will evoke the maximum 	response in naive viewers. Deserving romance for the woman, a sexy 	body for the men."

	He 	nodded. "This is more practical than I expected."

	"Cyrus, 	you are in the business of crafting dreams, not believing them. This 	is the down and dirty of sublime imagination. Now find your actress, 	and the play will write itself."

	"I'll 	try." He got up. "Won't the troupe members think I'm 	goofing off, if I just walk out.

	"You 	are the Playwright. A law unto yourself. They don't expect to 	comprehend your creative nature."

	He 	left the tent. Don was there, "Have you written the play, you 	faker?"

	"I'm 	working on it. At the moment we're going in search of an actress."

	"As 	if we didn't have four too many already,"

	"A 	special one."

	"So 	you say." The donkey was mechanically cynical.

	He 	mounted and rode out of the camp. No one challenged him.

	"Stay 	off the enchanted path," Melete said. "The woman we want 	won't be using it."

	"Why 	not?"

	"Because 	she'll be ashamed of her condition. She'll be lurking in some hidden 	cranny, avoiding exposure. We'll find her there. The most wonderful 	things are found in the least likely places."

	"If 	you say so ." He was feeling as cynical as the donkey. He 	guided Don onto a disreputable trail that led into the thick of a 	thinnet. and on to a halfhearted village of shacks. It was about as 	unpromising as a mud puddle.

	There 	were large, stout weeds growing along the sides. These had bugs 	clustered on their stems, sucking the juice from them. They looked 	like giant aphids.

	Then 	something flew in from the side. It was a huge bug. No, it was a 	Lady Bug. She landed beside the stems, stood straight, folded her 	gauzy wings, and covered them with glossy wing covers. Now she 	looked just like a girl in a red cloak.

	"Hello," 	Cyrus said behind her.

	She 	jumped, her wing covers spreading to unleash her wings. She hovered, 	looking wildly around, somewhat in dishabille as her gown flung out 	to expose her legs. "Oh," she said, spying him. "You 	startled me."

	"I 	apologize. You have pretty—"

	"Nuh 	uh," Melete warned.

	"Wings." 	he finished. Actually her whole body was pretty, especially from the 	underside,

	'Thank 	you." She settled back to the ground, and her gown closed about 	her front as her wing covers did around her back. "I am Lady 	Bug. I'm just tending my aphid garden."

	"Aphids?"

	"They 	make sweet syrup." She stroked the back of a bug and offered 	him her hand. "Taste it."

	Cyrus 	sucked off her fingers. The syrup was marvelously sweet. 	"Delicious."

	"We 	collect it and trade it for other goods," she explained. "To 	others, aphids are a pest, but to us they are valuable."

	"Yes." 	Cyrus couldn't think of anything else to say, so he introduced Don. 	"This is Don, my robot donkey. We are looking for actresses."

	Lady 	Bug straighted. "Actresses'?"

	"I 	am a playwright assembling a troupe. But I need a special actress 	for the lead role."

	She 	touched up her hair "Special in what way'.'"

	"She 	has to be a monster."

	"You 	mean like a winged monster'? I am one."

	"You're 	no monster!"

	'Technically 	all winged creatures are winged monsters. It's a classification, not 	an insult."

	"Like 	a woman with the head of a frog. Do you know of any?"

	"Oh. 	No. I'm afraid I don't." She looked disappointed. "I 	always wanted to be an actress. Do you have any other roles?"

	"I 	may. I haven't written the play yet. But the lead has to be a 	monster."

	"I'm 	afraid I can't help you," she said sadly.

	"But 	check by the camp when you have time," Don said. "Once he 	has his play written."

	"Oh! 	You talk!"

	"And 	you fly," the donkey retorted. "You're just lucky your 	panties didn't show when you hovered over us."

	"Don!" 	Cyrus snapped.

	But 	she laughed. "That's not luck. I know exactly what I'm showing. 	If I wanted to show panties, I'd do this." She pulled aside a 	portion of her gown.

	Cyrus 	freaked out. When he recovered, he was riding the donkey farther 	along the trail.

	"I 	warned you about annoying women," Melete reminded him.

	"But 	Don did it!"

	"She 	knew that. So maybe she was just trying to impress you."

	"She 	succeeded. I think."

	They 	continued along the trail. The sky darkened. "It looks like 	rain," Don remarked.

	"We 	can handle it," Cyrus said. "But can she?"

	For 	a woman was approaching them. She was brownish in color, and had an 	interesting walk.

	"She's 	not the one." Melete said.

	"It 	may rain," Cyrus said to the woman as they met. "You 	should get under cover."

	"No 	need. I am Umber Ella, I never get wet in a rainstorm," She 	walked on by.

	Don 	groaned without other comment.

	"We 	are meeting women, but not the one I'm looking for," Cyrus 	said.

	"Keep 	looking,'' Melete said, "I am sensing her nearby,"

	The 	rain held off. They encountered another girl. She was painting red 	and white stripes on bushes, making them look like candy.

	They 	paused to introduce themselves. "What are you doing?" Don 	asked.

	"I 	am Candy Striper, I paint the bushes so that they become candies 	that heal people. It is my little way of making Xanth a nicer 	place."

	She 	was right, but she was not the actress he needed.

	Now 	they encountered a man. He turned out to be Weslee Weredragon, who 	could breathe any type of dragon breath: fire, smoke, or steam. That 	wasn't the actress either.

	But 	Cyrus inquired anyway, explaining what he was looking for.

	Weslee 	nodded. "It happens I know a girl who fits your description. 	She does not have the face of a frog, but she's just as bad."

	"In 	what way?"

	"Her 	arms terminate in giant crab pincers. No one wants to embrace her. 	That's too bad, because she really is a sweet person, and very nice 	looking apart from that one problem."

	"She 	could be the one," Melete said.

	"Can 	you lead me to her?" Cyrus asked, interested.

	"Yes." 	The man paused. "Would you by chance have any likely role for a 	man with dragon breath?"

	"Find 	me my ideal lead actress, and I'll write a bit part for you."

	"Done." 	Weslee set off, and they followed.

	"What's 	her name?" Don asked.

	"They 	call her Crabapple. She pretends to like it."

	"So 	as not to hurt their feelings?" Cyrus asked.

	"Yes. 	As I said, she's a nice person. If only—" He shrugged.

	"But 	can she act?" Don asked.

	"I 	don't know. I see her only when she needs her weeds burned back."

	"Do 	her pincers work?"

	"Oh, 	yes. That's how she earns her keep: cutting vines into short length 	for ready storage. That's why the villagers treat her with respect. 	But there's not a man among them who would ever marry her. All she 	wants is to find true love and settle down to raise a family, but it 	will never happen.''

	"Notoriety 	can work wonders in such respects," Melete said. "Make her 	famous, and she'll find a man."

	They 	reached Crabapple's house. Weslee knocked, then announced himself 	before the door opened. "Crabapple! It's Weslee Weredragon. I 	brought you visitors from elsewhere."

	"Please 	take them away," a voice replied. "You know I don't like 	to be an exhibit."

	"This 	is different. It's a Playwright. He wants to cast you in a play,"

	"As 	a monster? No!"

	"Talk 	to her." Melete said.

	"Crabapple!" 	Cyrus called. "I am Cyrus Cyborg. I am writing a play with a 	mon—a woman like you, I need her for a role."

	"Don't 	tease me! It's not nice."

	"Please! 	Let me in. Talk to me. I think you're the one. But it will help if 	you can act."

	The 	door opened. There stood an elegant young woman in a voluminous 	cloak.

	"Well, 	now," Melete said. "But is she just a pretty face?"

	"You're 	beautiful," he said honestly. "May I see your body?" 	That didn't sound quite right, but he wasn't sure how to fix it.

	She 	spread her arms, wrapped in the cloak. It drew away from her torso, 	showing it bare. It was stunning.

	"Well 	now, doubled," Melete said appreciatively.

	Cyrus 	jammed his eyes closed before he freaked out, "I didn't mean 	nude. I thought you were—well, clothed."

	"It's 	hard to put on clothing over these."

	He 	opened his eyes cautiously. She had covered up her body and revealed 	her arms. They were ordinary to the elbows, but then became giant 	greenish pincers. Indeed, it would be difficult to don any ordinary 	shirt or dress with those in the way. So she was being practical. He 	simply hadn't expected it, "Can you act?"

	"I 	could if anyone let me."

	"Put 	her in a scene," Melete said. "A romantic one."

	"Pretend 	you're my girlfriend, angry with me but willing to be persuaded."

	"Come 	in."

	He 	left Don and Weslee outside and joined her inside the house. She 	closed the door behind him.

	"And 	where have you been, you rascal?" she demanded. "I have 	been waiting these three weeks for news of you, but there was 	nothing."

	"I 	was—busy," he said, already impressed by her delivery,

	"Busy! 	Busy! Whatever 	could keep you so busy you couldn't at least send me word? Were you 	with some village hussy? Answer me!"

	"Demur," 	Melete said, "Proffer her a mock gift."

	"No, 	no," he said, hastily improvising. "I was—making 	this gift for you. I couldn't tell you, because that would ruin the 	surprise."

	"Gift?" 	she asked suspiciously.

	"Here." 	He held out an empty hand.

	She 	took the invisible object. "Oh, it's lovely. Thank you so much! 	I'm so sorry I was suspicious. It's only because I love you."

	"And 	I love you. I—"

	She 	stepped into his arms, keeping her own arms clear, and kissed him 	firmly on the mouth.

	His 	arms closed automatically about her marvelously slender yet shapely 	body. Then he realized that it was still bare. He freaked out,

	"Bleep," 	Melete muttered helplessly.

	He 	recovered, uncertain how much time had passed. Crabapple had sat him 	in a chair and covered up again, "I'm so sorry, I got carried 	away. For an instant it seemed almost real. I get that way when I'm 	reciting lines. Its as though I really am the part I'm playing in my 	fancy, I apologize for putting you through that."

	"She 	will certainly do," Melete said.

	"You'll 	do," he said. "You can act. 	It felt real to me too. Then when I realized that you were—I 	don't have much experience with women.''

	She 	smiled. "I don't have much experience with men. Only in my 	fancy."

	"Tell 	her of the role," Melete said.

	"Let 	me tell you about the play I'm writing. A young man can see 	feelings, so he knows how women feel about him. But the pretty ones 	have ugly personalities. They conceal these, so as to seem nice, but 	really they hold him in contempt. So he knows they are no good for 	him to marry. So he searches for a woman with perfect feelings, not 	even looking at her body. Until he finds her—and she looks 	like you. Because you will be the lead actress.' '

	"The 	lead!"

	"It's 	all about how he comes to terms with you. Because you are the best, 	if he could only get over your—you know."

	"I 	know."

	"Something 	will happen—I haven't figured it out yet—that makes him 	come to truly appreciate your—your—"

	"Pincers."

	"Yes. 	You use them in some way that saves him from danger, or something, 	and then he comes to like them as an aspect of you. So it will be a 	happy ending, after considerable doubt. Can you accept that story 	line'.'"

	"Oh. 	yes."

	"Oh, 	yes," Melete echoed, "She's perfect. Caution her and sign 	her up."

	"You 	will need to emote, to make the audience truly feel your pain, and 	to come to love you, pincers and all. You have the face and 	features, and the acting ability. I simply need to write a play that 	will bring out those qualities. Will you join my troupe?"

	"Who 	is the lead man?"

	"Sharp 	question," Melete said. "She's hoping it's you. Better 	damp that out immediately."

	"He 	hasn't been selected yet. But he'll be competent, I assure you."

	Crabapple 	sighed. "But he won't be falling in love with me for real."

	"Not 	for real," he agreed, "It will all be an act."

	"I 	wish it could be real."

	"Actually, 	you could do worse," Melete said,

	Cyrus 	shook his head, "Crabapple, I can't promise it won't become 	real. Your body freaked me out, and I'm fully clothed. So it is 	possible he will—sometimes actors do fall for each other, and 	fulfill the roles they play. But—"

	"But 	I have these pincers."

	"That 	is the case, I need you for the play, and I believe you can do a 	good job. But whether men will want you for anything more than a 	passing dalliance, I can't say."

	"But 	keep her in mind," Melete said. "You do need a woman."

	Unless 	you are 	the second of the "two," Melete, he 	thought.

	That 	set her back, for once. "Not a wife, but a muse, I suppose it 	is possible."

	Meanwhile, 	Crabapple was nodding, "In short, you are telling me the 	truth."

	"Well, 	yes."

	'That's 	the way I want it. Yes, I will join your troupe. Is it far from 	here?"

	"Not 	far. But you can ride Don. That's my robot donkey."

	"Perhaps 	I will."

	"We 	are on our way," Melete said.





	Chapter 6: Curse


	Cyrus 	was back in his tent, writing madly. He had his lead actress, but as 	yet lacked the lead actor. He would have to assume that role 	himself, until he could 	cast some other man in the role.

	"Maybe 	we should bring in some pages," Melete said.

	"Pages?"

	"Folk 	that tind things. White and yellow pages, good at finding things or 	people. Set them to searching for a good male actor."

	"That 	would help. But how do we find the pages?"

	She 	laughed. "That's the problem. They 	aren't always where you need them."

	"You've 	got a visitor," Don said. The donkey had become the guardian of 	his necessary privacy for writing the play. Cyrus trusted the 	animal's judgment, to an extent. "A girl."

	"Tell 	her to check in with the Witch."

	"She 	demands to see you personally."

	Cyrus 	flung down his quill. It splattered blots of ink on his parchment. 	"How can I work, when I keep 	getting interrupted?" He realized that he was displaying 	Artistic Temperament, but didn't care. He flung open the tent flap.

	There 	was the girl. She wore a red dress, had red hair, and green eyes. 	She was about twelve years old. She wore a little golden crown. 	"Hi," she said, a bit shyly.

	"Look, 	I don't have a part for a child," he said. "You'll have to 	do drudge work around the camp. 	Otherwise go away."

	She 	entered the tent, brushing rather closely by him, "I know. But 	I had to talk with you first."

	"Well, 	I don't have to talk with you! Now stop 	wasting my time."

	She 	gazed at him with a cold expression. In fact in this moment her face 	reminded him of an eye sickle, a plate of ice with eyes. This was 	not the look of an ordinary child. That should have made him wary, 	but he was too impatient to be properly cautious.

	A 	small drum appeared in her hands. She produced an oddly shaped 	little baton and beat gently on it. There was a single small boom,

	Cyrus 	found himself frozen in place, unable to move half a muscle. What 	was happening?

	'That's 	a Sorceress!" Melete exclaimed from the desk where the block 	had been parked."

	"Right, 	Muse," the girl said. "I am Rhythm,"

	"The 	Princess!" Cyrus exclaimed, recovering or released from his 	stasis, "One of the three who were going to join us."

	"Just 	one, for now," Princess Rhythm said, "All three of us 	together would be a live giveaway. For one thing, we always speak in 	turns, completing each other's thoughts. So I had to come alone to 	let you know. In private."

	"You 	can hear me," Melete said, taken aback.

	"Oh, 	sure. I'm a Sorceress, remember? But I won't tell. I know Cyrus 	needs you." She studied the tiny bare upper torso. "Don't 	you freak him out?"

	"He's 	used to me," Melete said. "But I could freak him out if I 	tried. I won't, because I want him to write the play."

	"It 	must be nice to be able to freak out a man."

	"You 	should be able to do it, in six more years."

	"Two 	more years. Cousins Dawn and Eve were able to freak out men when 	they were fourteen."

	"They 	were naughty giris."

	"So 	are we." Rhythm said defiantly. "This whole Adult 	Conspiracy business is a pain in the pants."

	"You 	will need to blend in," Cyrus said, uneasy with the direction 	the dialogue was taking. Rhythm was a child, after all. "Different 	clothing, different hair. The crown has to go."

	"I'm 	not really a child," the girl protested. "I'm on the very 	verge of teendom." "Different attitude," Melete said, 	"You should work on the silver lining, the talent to 	discover advantages in any situation, even that 	of childhood."

	"I'll 	consider it." The girl paused, considering. "Nope, I have 	a better idea. I've heard that if you walk in someone else's shoes, 	you can live that person's life and do the same magic."

	"That's 	not true," Melete said.

	"So 	if I borrowed a grown woman's shoes, maybe then I could kick a stork 	or two in the tailfeathers."

	Ouch! 	This child had dangerously adult ideas.

	"So 	what?" Rhythm demanded, looking him in the eyeball, "Maybe 	the wood bees exist only on Ptero and will never be in Xanth. but we 	can still dream, can't we?"

	Cyrus 	remained uneasy. "You can read my thoughts?"

	"Some," 	Rhythm said. "Except for the Adult Conspiracy stuff. It comes 	with being a general purpose Sorceress."

	That 	was a relief. The fact was, she was a rather winsome girl, her 	status as a Sorceress Princess adding to her intrigue, and he didn't 	want her picking up any untoward thoughts. Especially when the 	actresses teased him, as they continued to do on occasion.

	"They 	tease you?" Rhythm asked. "How?"

	"Never 	mind," Melete said. "Just get changed."

	Rhythm 	sighed. She put her hands on her dress and tugged it upward. Her 	knees showed.

	"Not 	here!" Cyrus and Melete said together.

	"Why 	not?"

	"Because 	a man isn't supposed to see a girl—not even a girl 	child—unclothed," Cyrus said, "Because—" 	He broke off, staring.

	For 	Rhythm was now dressed in green jacket and shorts, the crown was 	gone, and her hair was dull brown. She had changed magically.

	She 	was, indeed, a Sorceress.

	"Are 	you going to write a part for me?" she asked, being the girl 	again.

	"Immediately," 	he agreed, returning to his desk. "But I can't call you Rhythm 	in the play, or in life. I'll call you Rhyme."

	"Okay," 	she agreed. "Rhyme or Reason."

	"It 	will be a bit part, so as not to attract undue notice. No one must 	know your real identity."

	"Actually 	I'll spread a disinterest spell, so no one will inquire. But it's 	true: no one must suspect."

	"No 	one," he echoed.

	"I'll 	go meet the Witch." Rhythm left the tent.

	"You've 	got to watch those thoughts," Melete said. "Winsome girl 	indeed. She's a child."

	"I 	know. She just took me by surprise." He focused on writing the 	part.

	"But 	also a Sorceress," she continued, "And a Princess. Never 	forget that."

	"How 	can I treat her as a garden-variety child when I'm not forgetting 	she's nothing of the kind?"

	"You 	have to be an actor, playing a role. In this case the role of 	yourself, addressing her role of unspecial child. You know better, 	and she knows better, but the rest of Xanth is the audience that 	doesn't know better. Play your roles well, and all should end well."

	Cyrus 	realized something. "You know my real mission? You read it in 	my mind?"

	"Yes. 	I would have suspected anyway, A beginning Playwright does not 	warrant the assistance of a Princess Sorceress, So I am helping you 	fulfill it."

	'Thank 	you," he said somewhat drily.

	"Now 	pick up your pen and kiss bust or kick butt," she said, her 	head sliding off the top as her bottom slid into view. Bust and 	butt.

	Cyrus 	was wickedly tempted to jam the quill at the butt. But he remembered 	her prior caution: not to needlessly aggravate a Sorceress or a 	Goddess, He focused instead on his scroll.

	"Good 	thing, too," Melete muttered as her head slid back into view.

	"Suppose 	I had done 	one or the other? Kissed or kicked?"

	"In 	your dreams, rascal."

	"I 	can dream of you?"

	"Naturally. 	I am largely made of dreams. Now quit dallying and start writing."

	"I'm 	ready to write the whole thing," he said. "But I don't 	know where to start it."

	"With 	the Curse," Melete said promptly.

	"How 	does that happen?"

	"Your 	lead man must aggravate a witch. That's another no-no in life, but a 	yes-yes in fiction. So she curses him."

	"I 	don't have a lead man cast for the role yet."

	"Put 	yourself in the role, in your mind. Every 	writer does."

	"Oh." 	He bent to the task.

	It 	went surprisingly 	well. Every time he paused to ponder, Melete goaded him 	with sharp remarks. He couldn't goof off 	while she was watching him. Which was perhaps much of the point of 	the Writer's Block: it prevented the writer from not 	writing.

	When 	he went out of the tent later, he found things well organized. The 	others were doing their menial parts, playing their social roles, 	making it a 	viable temporary mini-community. Rhythm, who had introduced herself 	as Rhyme, had blended right in; no one noticed her particularly, or 	seemed to realize that she had just joined them this day.

	"Talk 	to them," Melete advised. "They are desperate for news of 	the Play."

	She 	was of course correct. So after the 	evening meal he bonged on a glass to attract their attention. "I 	have my Writer's Block," he announced. "And it is enabling 	me to write. I have fairly started the Play today."

	They 	broke into applause.

	"The 	lead man—we don't have an actor for him yet, so I will have to 	substitute in rehearsals for now—will aggravate a witch." 	He glanced at the Witch. "Your role, of course."

	"Goody!" 	she exclaimed. "I can handle that part."

	"She 	will curse him to see people's natures and emotions as colored 	clouds or auras surrounding them. He can't actually read their 	minds, but he will know immediately how they feel about things, 	including him."

	"That's 	a curse?" Aero asked. "I'd love to have it."

	"It's 	a curse," he said, "It will take him a while to realize 	it. That's part of the point of the play. He is looking for his 	ideal girlfriend, and this is where the curse begins to register. 	His first girlfriend—you, Xina—will be beautiful, but 	her private feelings are mercenary and unkind. She wants only to use 	him for convenience."

	"I 	can play that role," 	Xina said, thrilled to have the part.

	"Once 	he realizes that she is not ideal emotionally, he looks at the auras 	instead, hoping to find the perfect one. Feelings are more important 	than appearances. He needs to marry by a certain deadline; that may 	be part of the curse. The witch wants him to marry foolishly 	and be unhappy ever after. Finally he finds 	her, his ideal aura—but she has crab claws instead of hands."

	"Oh!" 	Crabapple exclaimed, delighted. "I can play that role!"

	Obviously 	she could; he had written it for hen "But that turns him off; 	it's too much of an adjustment. So he decides to shut out the aura 	and live with illusion, staying with the pretty girl even though he 	knows she's just using him." He smiled a trifle grimly. 	"Appearances are important to a man."

	AH 	the women nodded. They understood perfectly.

	"The 	witch realizes that her curse is no longer working properly, so she 	decides to kill Xina just before the marriage, forcing him to make a 	last moment substitute. He won't have time to find a lovely woman 	both outside and inside, and will have to settle for an 	unsatisfactory one. So she sends her daughter—Rhyme—with 	a gift that will kill Xina, But Crabapple saves her, not only 	winning Xina's friendship but convincing him that Crabapple's his 	best match after all. Pincers have their place. That's the gist of 	it."

	"But 	what of us?" Dusti asked, gesturing to herself and Aero.

	"You'll 	have smaller parts, and I'll try to write you lead parts in 	subsequent plays. This is an ensemble; there will be several plays. 	Each actress will have her turn."

	The 	girls exchanged a glance and a half, then smiled. They were 	satisfied. He was coming through.

	That 	night he slept alone, and dreamed of Melete, She was full figured 	and nude, as she had been when he found her in the gourd.

	"You 	did well, Cyrus," she said, expanding to full human size,

	"Don't 	freak me out!" he said as his eyeballs began to loci: up, "I'm 	trying to walk the causeway."

	"Walk 	the what?"

	'The 	causeway. Walking along it makes a person do things for a good 	cause. You are thoroughly distracting me from anything like that."

	"Oh, 	all right." A gauzy gown formed around her body. "But 	you're going to have to get used to me in this version as well as in 	the bust version. You have a lot more writing to do."

	"Yes, 	But it is going well, now, thanks to you,"

	"And 	it will continue well. I will see to that." She came up and 	kissed him.

	His 	head threatened to float away. He struggled to recover equilibrium. 	"Are you trying to seduce me? I 	thought you were here to stop that."

	"I 	am here to make sure you write your plays. Part of that is to make 	you more immune to the seductions of the actresses. They haven't 	given up on you; they are just being more subtle. Until we find you 	a suitable woman to marry, we have to be on guard."

	"This 	is just like the play!"

	"By 	no coincidence." she agreed. "You are animating your own 	aspirations and fears. All writers do. But we need to stop you from 	freaking out too readily. That's too much of a distraction."

	"Lots 	of luck," he muttered.

	She 	powdered her face and scowled. He realized that she had just used 	scowling powder, which was a caustic glare dried out and rendered 	into powder form for use as necessary, usually as a cleanser. It was 	possible to know such things in dreams. "Luck has little to do 	with it. All women have similar equipment; it merely varies in size 	and exposure. Once you are desensitized there should be no further 	problem." She squeezed him close,

	"No 	problem!" he exclaimed, "I'm just about ready to—"

	She 	did not withdraw, "Ready to what?"

	"Ready 	to write a great love scene," he said, surprised.

	'That's 	it. The closer you get to me, the more ui]gent your need to write 	becomes. That's my nature. Now wake up and write that scene."

	He 	woke up. He discovered he was holding the bust, his fingers clasping 	the torso section. No wonder he had gotten ideas in his sleep.

	"No 	wonder," Melete agreed, half fondly.

	He 	got up, set her on the desk, lit a candle, and started writing. Soon 	he had a great near-seduction scene.

	In 	a few days he had the first draft of the play. He wasn't quite 	satisfied with it.

	"Don't 	be concerned." Melete said. "A true artist is never fully 	satisfied with his work. Go into rehearsals, and modify what doesn't 	work well."

	"I 	can do that?"

	"You 	can do what you choose. It's all part of the creative process."

	"I'll 	need to copy the play, so the actors can read it and memorize their 	parts,"

	"No 	need. Rhythm will do that for you."

	"She 	will? But she shouldn't show her magic."

	"She 	won't."

	He 	went out to find Rhythm, realizing that he didn't need to talk 	openly to her. He ju.st focused the thought clearly: / need 	copies of the play. She saw him and 	nodded, but did nothing.

	Yet 	when he returned to his tent, there were five copies of the play on 	his desk, with a sign: COURTESY of a 	passing copy cat.

	"There's 	your explanation," Melete said. "The Princess must not be 	credited,"

	He 	nodded. "She is turning out to be useful on occasion. I like 	her,"

	"Beware."

	"She's 	a child!" he snapped. "Can't I like her for her 	usefulness?"

	"No. 	It's not safe to like a Princess or a Sorceress of any age for any 	reason. She must not get ideas."

	"How 	could a child get ideas?"

	"Ignorance 	of the content of the Adult Conspiracy does not mean there is no 	interest in it. Children are fascinated by the mystery, and 	sometimes seek to abridge it. They can get unrealistic notions, and 	she's a prime candidate, as she herself says. Do not let her do you 	too many favors."

	He 	shook his head. "You're paranoid. She's just a girl."

	"A 	girl with phenomenal powers."

	It 	seemed pointless to argue with her. He picked up the copies and went 	out to distribute them to the actresses, courtesy of the visiting 	copy cat.

	He 	gave them two days to start memorizing their parts, while he 	pondered sets and costumes, "The first scene should be at the 	witch's residence." he decided. "Maybe a haunted house. 	Except that's too complicated to put together on a traveling stage."

	"Make 	it her garden," Melete suggested. "Where she grows her 	witchly herbs and maybe brews the less savory concoctions."

	"Yes! 	And he can be just passing by, not realizing it's a private garden. 	Maybe he steps on some of her plants, not realizing. Like butter 	fingers, which look like lady fingers, but make whoever touches them 	get clumsy. Witchy stuff she hates to have ruined. That sets up the 	dialogue, and gets him cursed, I'll have to make a spot revision of 	the script. Too bad I didn't think of this 	before we got the copies."

	Rhythm 	appeared, fading in beside the desk, "It's been done."

	"Done? 	I don't see how."

	"The 	copies have been moditied, per your description," she 	explained. "No one will notice,"

	"You've 	been snooping on my mind!"

	"I 	like your mind,"

	"But—"

	"Magic," 	Melete said, "Thank you, Princess."

	"You're 	welcome. Muse." Rhythm turned to face Cyrus, He couldn't help 	noticing again how pretty she was, in her bright red dress with her 	red hair bound by a red ribbon. She was indeed on the very verge of 	becoming a woman.

	"Nuh-uh," 	Melete murmured.

	Rhythm 	frowned. "What's wrong with being pretty?"

	"You're 	in your Princess outfit," Melete said.

	"Only 	for Cyrus, alone. Everyone else sees the dull girl." She smiled 	at him. "Do you think I'm dull?"

	He 	opened his mouth, and stifled whatever he might have said. How could 	he compliment her without encouraging one of those unrealistic 	notions? Yet she was almost beautiful.

	So 	he changed the subject, "I am working on costumes and sets. Do 	you have any ideas?"

	"Sure, 	Show that curse. You know, the colored auras."

	"I 	don't think that's possible. The audience will just have to suspend 	its disbelief," .

	"It's 	possible,"

	"You 	don't understand. It would require serious magic to show them. We 	don't have it."

	"Yes 	we do."

	"No 	we don't! That kind of spell—"

	He 	broke off, for there was a white haze forming around Rhythm,

	"A 	different color for each actress," Rhythm said.

	"You 	could do that?" he asked, awed.

	"Oh, 	sure. It takes me a while to work up a new spell, but I can do it. I 	think it would really enhance the play."

	"It 	would," he agreed, "But—"

	"But 	what?" she asked, turning a look on him that he couldn't quite 	fathom. It wasn't the kind of look he expected from a child. Part 	innocence, part knowing, part something else. What was in her mind?

	"But 	it would give away your identity." Meiete said.

	"Not 	if Cyrus went out and found the spell in the woods. The same way he 	found the copy cat."

	"I 	suppose that's true," Cyrus agreed. "It would be very nice 	for the play. Thank you. Rhythm."

	"Any 	time, Cyrus," she said, with a faint blush as she faded out.

	"These 	are treacherous waters," Meiete said darkly. "That girl 	has womanly ambition."

	Cyrus 	didn't even try to understand that remark.

	They 	still had not found a lead male actor by rehearsal time, so Cyrus 	played the part. For the moment it became his life.

	He 	walked along the path, missing the detour sign that would have 	steered him right. Suddenly he was crunching herbs underfoot.

	"You 	clumsy oaf!" the Witch screamed in full Old Crone mode, "You 	squished my bleeding heart orchid!"

	"I'm 	sorry." Cyrus said, "I didn't see—"

	"Didn't 	see? Didn't see! I'll 	make you see, numskull! I'll curse you with Feeling Sight! Now 	begone!"

	Cyrus 	hastily departed. "What kind of curse was that?" he asked 	himself aloud. Thoughts in a play had to be spoken aloud. "I 	never heard of Feeling Sight. Well, I had better resume my quest for 	the Ideal Wife."

	He 	encountered Aero, in a skimpy outfit. "Now here is a pretty 	woman," he said. "Maybe she's the one."

	"One 	for what?" Aero asked, smiling.

	"One 	to be my Ideal Wife."

	"Oh, 	I am surely that," she said, smiling beatifically.

	But 	now he saw something else. "What is that glowing cloud around 	you?" For indeed, she was surrounded by greenish light. He 	didn't have to imagine it; the color was there for a whole audience 	to see, though it was theoretically only visible to him. This was 	the special magic of the play,

	"What 	glow?" she asked.

	"The 	light around you. Don't you see it?"

	"There's 	no light around me," she said, irritated. Now the green was 	shot with streaks of black. "Now are you going to marry me or 	aren't you? I don't have all day, you know."

	"The 	Witch cursed me with Feeling Sight," he said to himself. "This 	must be it. I sense that the color of my Ideal Wife will be pure 	white. But this woman is green. She's not the one." Then, to 	her, "I will not marry you. Your glow is wrong."

	"Why 	kind of bleep is this?" she demanded. But he had already moved 	on, leaving her to gesture her frustration theatrically behind him. 	He had just done a dramatic no-no. Scorning a Woman.

	Next 	he encountered Dusti, in a fetching if slightly dusty dress. Her 	glow was pink. "No, she's not the one either," he said 	regretfully.

	"Not 	the one for what?" she demanded.

	"Not 	the one to marry." He walked on, leaving her, too, with black 	streaks across her glow.

	"Nobody 	asked you!" she called after him, another Woman Scorned.

	Then 	he came to Xina, in spectacularly skimpy shorts and halter. Her glow 	was blue.

	"Now 	I appreciate the curse," he said. "Every woman is wrong. I 	can't marry this one either."

	"Are 	you going to make decisions based on some stupid glow?" Xina 	demanded, "Instead of this?" She dropped her halter 	halfway.

	Cyrus's 	eyes locked up, as would those of any male members of the audience. 	"Yes," he said regretfully, and managed to walk on, eyes 	scrunched up.

	"You're 	a fool," she muttered angrily. "What man cares about a 	glow, as long as a girl's got a body?" Not only had she been 	Scorned, she had wasted a perfectly good half-Flash.

	"That 	witch certainly did curse me," Cyrus said as he walked, still 	speaking his thoughts carefully aloud, so 	the audience could hear "Every nice-looking girl is wrong, and 	now that I can see that, I can't be satisfied with her. Am I doomed 	not to marry?"

	He 	continued to walk, and had another thought. "Maybe I should 	look for the Perfect Glow, instead of for the Perfect Body. That 	might find me the Perfect Wife and save me from the rigors of 	perpetual bachelorhood."

	Encouraged, 	he peered around, seeking the glow. And soon he found it, 	surrounding a shapely young woman in a cloak. "Hello," he 	said to her. "I am Cyrus. I am looking for the Perfect Wife, 	who I know by her pure white glow. You have that glow. Who are you?"

	"Thank 	you," she said, smiling prettily. "I am Crabapple. But I 	don't think you want to marry me."

	"Why 	not? You seem to have the qualities I require."

	"Because 	of these.' ' She drew back her cloak to reveal her forearms and 	hands. Except that they were not hands; they were giant greenish 	crab pincers. She clacked them in the air so that every member of 	the future audience could see them,

	Cyrus 	was dramatically appalled. His gaze went back and forth between a 	Perfect Glow and her imperfect extremities. "I can't do this," 	he said.

	"I 	understand," she said with regret. "I have encountered 	this reaction before. I wish you well in your continuing search."

	Cyrus 	stumbled away, "What a curse," he exclaimed. "It puts 	me in the pincers of an awful dilemma." There should be a laugh 	from the audience at that line.

	Then 	he reconsidered. "But maybe if I shut my eyes to the glow, I'll 	be able to return to my prior state, and be happy with a girl's 	exterior. What man really cares about what's inside, so long as 	what's outside is appealing?"

	He 	turned around and walked back the way he had come. He came to Xina, 	who remained in place, "I have changed my mind," he said, 	"I want to marry you."

	"What, 	despite my wrong glow?" she asked sharply.

	"What 	glow? I don't see any glow."

	She 	nodded. "In that case, okay, I will marry you. When is the 	wedding?"

	"Tomorrow," 	he said,

	"Good. 	That gives me time to prepare my wedding gown." She kissed him, 	an Unscomed Woman. "See you tomorrow."

	"Right," 	he agreed, staggering in place to show how he had been half stunned 	by the kiss.

	"I 	can't believe that such a good catch just fell into my hand," 	Xina said. "I will surely have lots of fun with him before I 	throw him away." She hurried off.

	"I 	hope I'm doing the right thing," Cyrus said, his posture 	showing that he doubted it. He stepped behind a tree.

	The 	Witch came onstage. "Curses! He's no longer responding to my 	curse. He's going to marry anyway, and avoid a lifetime of 	loneliness. That is the waste of a good curse. What can I do?" 	She pondered a moment. "I know. I'll kill the bride before the 	wedding. Then he'll be truly stuck. Hee hee hee!" She made a 	wonderfully witchly cackle.

	The 	Witch beckoned someone offstage. Rhythm came to her. "Daughter 	Rhyme," the witch said. "Take this feather boa to Cyrus. 	Tell him you found it in the forest and thought it would make a 	perfect wedding gift for his bride."

	"Yes, 	Mother Witch," the girl said dutifully. She took the feathery 	scarf and carried it across the stage to Cyrus, who reappeared from 	behind the tree, reactivating his scene. "Look at what I found, 	Cyrus," she said. "Wouldn't this make the perfect gift for 	your bride, right before the wedding?"

	"Why 	yes it would," he agreed, taking the boa. "Thank you, 	child. Who are you?"

	"I'm 	Rhyme," she said. "I'm someone's daughter." She 	departed.

	Cyrus 	held up the boa. "This is beautiful. I'll give it to Xina 	tomorrow, just before the wedding."

	The 	scene ended. The crux had been set up.

	Then 	it was next day, in the play: the next scene. Curtis Curse Friend 	had to play the part of the King, so as to have the authority to 	marry them, until they found a suitable actor. What about a Best 	Man? That was Weslee Weredragon, who had decided to join the troupe. 	But Xina needed a Maid of Honor. That was covered in the play.

	"I 	will do it." Crabapple said. "I want to see him 	satisfied."

	Xina 	did not object, though obviously she thought Crabapple was a fool. 	Except for one thing: "Keep your claws covered. I don't want my 	wedding ruined."

	"Of 	course."

	"I 	have a gift for you," Cyrus said, proffering the feather boa.

	"Oh, 	how nice," Xina said. She took it and wrapped it grandly around 	her neck and shoulders. It looked elegant.

	Then 	.something went wrong. The boa tightened around her neck, choking 	her. Cyrus and the King tried to pull it off, but its coils were too 	muscular Xina was about to dramatically expire, waving her arms 	helplessly.

	Crabapple 	threw off her cloak, uncovering her pincers. She clamped them on 	either side of Xina's neck and squeezed. The boa was cut into three 	pieces that dropped to the ground, wriggling helplessly, shedding 	its mortal coils. It had been destroyed.

	"I'm 	sorry I ruined your wedding," Crabapple said.

	"You 	saved my life!" Xina exclaimed. "You were a true friend 	after I treated you like a freak."

	"Well, 	you couldn't marry him if you died first."

	"And 	you love him yourself. Much better than I do. You should marry him."

	"He 	doesn't want me,"

	But 	Cyrus was suffering a dramatic reassessment. "Those pincers are 	good protection. Now they look pretty."

	"I'd 	rather be a live Maid of Honor than a dead bride," Xina said, 	"Marry her."

	"Her 	aura is perfect." he agreed. "And so is her body," He 	looked at her bare form, which was now artfully posed for the 	appreciation of the audience. There was no audience yet, but the 	rehearsal pretended there was.

	So 	Crabapple stood beside Cyrus, and the play-King pronounced them 	married.

	"Oh," 	Aero said, mopping her eyes. "Weddings always make me cry."

	"Me 	too," Dusti said. Her tears were dust.

	'That's 	not in the script,'' Xina snapped, "It's not a real wedding."

	"If 	they can cry at it, they should be there," Curtis said. "It 	lends verisimilitude."

	All 	of the others paused to look at him. "Lends what?" Cyrus 	asked, sifting through his memory banks.

	"It 	is from 'very similar,' " Curtis said. "It means that it 	has the appearance of truth. We always strive for that in our 	plays."

	"That's 	what we want," Cyrus agreed. "I'll revise that portion."

	"Now 	if we can return to the play proper," Curtis said. "It is 	time for you to kiss the bride and walk happily off into the 	sunset."

	"Oh." 	Cyrus embraced Crabapple, struck again by how nice her torso was. He 	kissed her. That was nice too. Then they held hands, in a manner, 	and walked offstage. The play was done.

	"That 	seems viable," Curtis said, "With some tweaking, and a 	full roster of actors."

	Cyrus 	agreed. He knew it was far from perfect, but for his first effort, 	he was well satisfied. They would sharpen it up with later 	rehearsals.

	"Thank 	you so much for this part," Crabapple murmured. "When you 	held me and kissed me, I almost thought you meant it."

	He 	had almost thought so too.





	Chapter 7: Complications


	But 	we are forgetting that hint. Two to the Fifth," Melete said. 	"You are only one. You need a partner. Then you can tackle the 	rest of it."

	"But 	I have no prospects for marriage." he protested. "Besides, 	I like being a Playwright,"

	"You 	can be a Playwright. Just find the right woman. Consider the 	actresses. They are all interested in you."

	"I 	wish there really was a visible aura," he said. "So I 	could see who was right for me."

	Rhythm 	appeared with the sound of the beat of her drum, "I can make it 	real,"

	"You 	canr*

	"Sure. 	Melete's right; the way those stupid actresses flirt with you, you 	need to be married to fend them off."

	"She 	has a point." Melete agreed.

	"Go 	look at them now," Rhythm said. "They will have auras that 	only you can see."

	"They 	will?"

	"Like 	this." She used two chicken leg drumsticks to beat her drum 	again. That was why they had looked odd, before; he hadn't picked up 	on their nature. A white light appeared around her.

	Bemused, 	he tucked Melete into his pocket and went out to look at women. They 	did have auras—the same ones that showed in the play, but 	turned off after the rehearsal. "The little minx," Melete 	murmured. "She gave them their real auras."

	And 	the only play-aura suitable for him was Crabapple. This made him 	pause. She was a nice person, without doubt, and he had gotten used 	to her pincers, and she was very nice to hold close. But this was 	not the play, and he was not at all sure he wanted to marry hen.

	'Too 	bad," Melete said. "You men are too locked into perfection 	of form. Let's check again.

	So 	he walked about the lot again, considering auras. Now, with Melete's 	remarks, he saw how the other actresses were flirting with him. 	Rhythm was right about that. They weren't too direct, but they were 	definitely smiling at him, and subtly posing, showing off their 	figures. They all knew how to catch the eye of a man, without being 	obvious.

	Aero 	was sitting in the kitchen area sorting potatoes for dinner, and 	somehow her skirt rode up on her thighs, showing off her nice legs. 	"That exposure isn't by accident," Melete said. He 	disliked admitting that those legs nevertheless turned him on. They 	reminded him of the rest of her body, when he had first seen her in 	the moat along with her myriad copies.

	Dusti 	was scrubbing the dust off a tent, and as he passed she had a low 	place to work on, so that she bent well down and he could see into 	her halter "She saved that spot for when you came by,'' Melete 	said. Regardless, those dusky globes turned him on too.

	Xina, 	seemingly oblivious to his presence, was scrubbing clothing at the 	pond, nude at the edge of the water That almost made him jump in to 	join her "Water is marvelous for bodies." Melete said. "It 	conceals some and flashes some, attracting the eye. One has to 	admire her technique."

	"I 	do," he said, tearing his eyeballs away with slight sucking 	sounds.

	The 	Witch was harvesting assorted pies for the next meal, as the cast 	had gotten tired of sandwiches. She was fully clothed but in a 	voluptuous state. She darted him a glance that fairly heated his 	clothing and straightened out his hair She knew what she was doing, 	and knew he knew it, but it remained effective. It made him want to 	find out what else she could straighten. The others were young and 	fresh, while the Witch was thoroughly experienced. She knew exactly 	what to do, and how to do it, and that was something that he in his 	inexperience appreciated.

	"Any 	of them would marry you," Melete said. "They all regard 	you as a good catch. You are handsome, strong, talented, and 	diffident, so they could readily run your life. But all of their 	auras are wrong. You would have fun with them for a while, but then 	would discover objectionable differences and be less than satisfied. 	Only a pure white aura is right for you."

	"The 	kind Crabapple has," he agreed morosely.

	"And 	she's the only one who is not flirting with you."

	That 	was interesting. So he went back to Crabapple. "Suppose I could 	see auras, as in the play, and yours was the right one for me. Would 	you marry me?"

	"No, 	Cyrus," she said regretfully. "You're a nice man. and very 	attractive, but I would be bad for your 	public image. You'll never become a famous Playwright if I'm with 	you."

	"What 	if I don't believe that?"

	"Unfortunately, 	I do believe it. I must not cripple your chances," she said, 	and turned away.

	'That 	was as nice a turndown as could be imagined," Melete said. "She 	was careful not to hurt your feelings. She does like you, but 	doesn't want to harm you by her association. She's being extremely 	unselfish."

	"She's 	too bleeping nice for me."

	'That 	is the case. That is surely why her aura is white. She would be 	right for almost any man."

	He 	returned to his tent. He set Melete down on the writing table and 	considered his script. He had spot revisions to do, but his mind 	couldn't focus properly on it,

	"But 	there are other women," Melete said. "Why don't you take a 	walk around the area beyond the camp, looking at auras?"

	"I'll 	do that," he agreed, rising. He stepped outside the tent and 	strode beyond the troupe camp.

	Only 	when he was well clear of it did he realize that he had forgotten to 	put Melete in his pocket. Well, she could surely survive an hour 	without him.

	Rhythm 	appeared, "I was naughty," she said, walking beside him.

	"You 	were? I did not notice."

	"I 	made you forget to bring her."

	"You 	made me forget? But why?"

	"Because 	I wanted to talk with you alone,"

	"I 	am ready to talk with any member of the troupe, at any time," 	he said. "All you had to do was ask."

	"She 	wouldn't have let me be alone with you."

	He 	nodded. That was true, though he wasn't sure why. "What did you 	want to talk to me about?"

	"Two 	things. I know you are looking for a woman to marry, and aren't 	satisfied with the actresses, I thought I could help."

	"Help? 	How?"

	"By 	enabling you to broaden your search. Maybe sticking to women your 	own crafted age is too limited. That's a very thin slice of 	womandom."

	"It 	is," he agreed. "But what use would I have for any that 	are too old?"

	"Or 	too young," she said.

	"I 	wouldn't even consider those."

	She 	paused, evidently seeking the right phrasing. "Yet suppose one 	who is too young now, would be just right for you once she matures? 	Would you want to pass her by?"

	"I 	suppose not. But that's academic. I need to marry now."

	"Yes. 	So you can't wait. It's too bad."

	"It's 	the way it is," he said shortly. "The Adult Conspiracy 	makes it impossible."

	"I 	 wish I understood the Adult Conspiracy better." she said. "But 	of course I don't."

	"By 	definition," he agreed.

	"Yet 	my sister Melody already has a boyfriend, and she'll marry him when 	they come of age. On Planet Ptero they are already of age, and doing 	whatever they want. They even have a child. I'm jealous."

	This 	dialogue was making him uncomfortable. "This isn't Ptero."

	"Piper's 	coming."

	"What?"

	"The 	girl you met on the way to the Good Magician's Castle."

	"How 	could you know that?"

	"I 	can read your mind, remember?"

	He 	was taken aback. "I forgot about that."

	"You 	think I'm a winsome girl."

	"Oh. 	bleep!" For of course it was true. He knew he had no right to 	see her as anything other than a child. A Sorceress, and a Princess, 	but still a child. It was embarrassing to have such a wrong thought, 	and worse to have her know it.

	Yet, 	oddly she seemed satisfied rather than confused or alarmed. What was 	going on in her mind?

	"I'll 	never tell," she murmured.

	Bleep!

	A 	girl appeared on the path ahead, "Hello, Piper," he 	called.

	"Hi, 	Cyrus," she replied. "Who is your friend?"

	"This 	is—" he paused, remembering that Rhythm was supposed to 	be anonymous.

	"Rhyme. 	A girl in his play," Rhythm said. "He's a Playwright now,"

	"Oh. 	that's so wonderful," Piper said, clapping her hands. "I 	wish I could be an actress."

	She 	and every other girl. "Maybe when you get older," Cyrus 	said.

	"But 	I'm thirteen. Rhyme looks only twelve. She's in your play."

	"And 	he is looking for a girl to marry," Rhythm said. She elbowed 	him. "Note her aura."

	The 	little mischief! For Piper's aura was pure white.

	Now 	Piper eyed him in a disturbingly appraising manner. Why did he 	suspect at times that girls were not always entirely innocent about 	the Adult Conspiracy? "I wonder," she murmured. "A 	girl could certainly do worse."

	"You're 	too young!" he said desperately.

	"But 	it happens we have a spell," Rhythm said. "It ages a 	person one decade, for an hour."

	"That's 	interesting," Piper said. "I'd like to try it."

	"Here 	it is." Rhythm handed her a little ball. "Bite it,"

	Piper 	bit it. It burst into vapor, for a moment obscuring her. Then the 	mist cleared,

	A 	fully adult, twenty-three-year-old woman stood before him, "Suddenly 	I know all about the Adult Conspiracy." Piper said, "It is 	a necessary thing." She adjusted her dress, which fit her 	somewhat tightly now. In fact rather more bosom showed than was 	usual, as it strained at the girl-sized bodice lacing. "So you 	are looking for a wife?"

	"Well, 	not exactly," he said.

	"Yes 	he is," Rhythm said. "But she has to be just right for 	him,"

	"But 	is he just right for her?" Piper asked.

	"What 	do you mean?" Cyrus asked, bemused by this abrupt shift,

	"Now 	that I am mature, it occurs to me that my girlish dream of marrying 	a handsome man and living happily ever after is not well grounded in 	reality," Piper said seriously. "You're a nice man, but I 	think not my type for a long-term relationship, I am concerned 	about cyborg qualities I might come not to 	appreciate. Would our children have metal bones?"

	Yet 	her aura was white: right for him. This was a new concept: she was 	right for him, but he might not be right for her. There needed to be 	a match both ways,

	'This 	is sensible," Cyrus agreed.

	"Still, 	since in permanent life I am still a teen, I believe I will indulge 	myself for a while. I will join your troupe, hoping for some small 	part on stage. By the time I am grown, that foolishness will have 	been expended, and I will be ready to settle down with a man who 	loves oak trees."

	"Welcome 	to join," Cyrus said. He had no interest in devoting his life 	to tending oak trees. So it was turning out that her caution was 	justified. Perfect women, it seemed, had sensible concerns. "The 	troupe is farther along this path."

	'Thank 	you." Piper walked on. By the time she reached the troupe, she 	would revert to her real age.

	Cyrus 	turned to Rhythm. "That was certainly interesting. Your magic 	amazes me."

	"I 	am a Sorceress," she reminded him. "Because I am general 	purpose, I can do just about any magic. But I have to craft it 	beforehand, as I did with the Decade spell. It's not an automatic 	talent like flying or growing ears on tree trunks. When I am with my 	sisters, we can do things much faster."

	"But 	their presence here would give away your nature," he said, 	remembering.

	"That, 	too," she agreed.

	"There's 	something else?"

	"I 	need to get out on my own. To discover my own identity. My own 	dreams. Not to be an almost perfect copy of my two sisters."

	'That 	makes sense."

	"I'm 	a sensible girl."

	"Yes 	you are. You have been an enormous help to the troupe."

	She 	blushed. "Thank you."

	"You 	said there were two things you wanted to talk to me about. One was 	the Decade spell, so I could seek more widely for my periect woman. 	That dialogue with Piper taught me something: that it's not just how 	good she would be for me, but how good I would be for her. That was 	very helpful of you. Now what was the other thing?"

	"I 	will tell you in the right place," she said. "There's a 	special path. This way." She led the way to a side path he 	hadn't noticed before.

	He 	followed her, feeling guilty for noticing again that she moved 	lithely, with nice legs. She would be a lovely woman when she 	matured. She was already well on the way there.

	'Thank 	you."

	Now 	he blushed. He had been caught again by her mind reading ability. 	That would be another one of the talents she had crafted in advance, 	"I shouldn't have been thinking that. I apologize,"

	"Why?"

	"Because 	it's not right to look at girls as if they are women. The Adult 	Conspiracy—"

	"Is 	a pain!" she exclaimed. "I wish it didn't exist."

	'There 	is good reason for it."

	"I 	don't believe it. It's just a plot to torment children, and some who 	aren't really children."

	He 	did not try to argue the case. No child was capable of understanding 	that particular thing. So he changed the subject. "Where is 	this place you are taking me?"

	"It's 	a nice little glade with a nice little pond. Very special."

	"Special?"

	Now 	she changed the subject back. "You shouldn't think of me as a 	child, Cyrus. I'm really not."

	He 	could almost hear Melete muttering "Treacherous waters!" 	He needed to stop this line of discussion. "You are twelve 	years old. Rhythm."

	"No. 	Only in my body."

	He 	smiled indulgently. "That defines you."

	She 	paused in the path, facing him with disturbing intensity. "Let 	me explain something, Cyrus. Not long ago I was seventeen. That's 	Old Enough."

	He 	knew better than to ask old enough for what. She was too close and 	too pretty. "That temporary aging spell? I don't think that 	counts."

	'This 	was different. Do you know much about Mundania?"

	"Not 	much," he admitted. "Oh, there's data in my bank, but—"

	"They 	have something called Daylight Saving Time."

	He 	sorted through his memory. "Yes, I find it now. They get up an 	hour earlier in summer to take advantage of extra daylight, then 	revert in the fall. It strikes me as like cutting one end off a 	stick and gluing it to the other end to make it longer. But what can 	you expect? It's Mundania."

	She 	laughed, almost falling into him. He had to put his hands on her 	elbows to steady her. Somehow his arms wound up partly around her as 	her lai^e eyes lifted to meet his. There was a faint pleasant scent. 	He remembered the rest of Melete's remark: the girl had womanly 	ambition. He stepped back, embarrassed.

	"Thank 	you," she said. There was something in her manner that made him 	suspect that she hadn't really lost her balance,

	"Welcome." 	He felt himself blushing, for no reason.

	'Those 	extra hours need to be properly handled." she continued after a 	fetching moment. "They come to the village of Century, where a 	giant century plant stores excess time. The villagers catch the 	hours as they drift in and stack them safely around the plant. Then 	in fall they send them back. There would be real disruption if they 	got lost; Mundania might get stuck permanently on the early time. 	Those folk wouldn't like that."

	"They 	wouldn't," he agreed. She was still standing too close, and he 	couldn't retreat farther on the narrow path. Was she trying to spin 	a story to keep him there? "Is there a point to this 	discussion?"

	"There 	is, Cyrus. There was an accident a few months ago, and a number of 	skilled villagers were rendered impossibly old. putting them out of 	service."

	"Old? 	I don't see—"

	"It's 	complicated, but the essence is that when a person handles an hour, 	he or she ages that hour Since there are thousands of hours, this 	can have considerable effect. They become significantly older in the 	summer, and then return to their younger ages in fall. They are used 	to it, but it's not a job anyone else can do. So when things went 	wrong—"

	"You 	stepped in!" he said, finally catching on.

	"The 	three of us stepped in," she agreed. "As general-purpose 	Sorceresses we were able to adapt and fill in until the village was 	able to obtain youth elixir to restore their aged workers. That was 	a job that required twenty-five days, but of course the hours 	couldn't wait without causing real mischief So Melody went first, to 	do the first third of the job. She's always first. She went there 	for six days, and handled the hours for them, and in that time she 	aged three years, then reverted when she 	returned to Castle Roogna."

	"So 	she was still twelve," he said.

	"In 	body. But she had been fifteen at the village. She said it was a 	unique experience. For one thing, her body bloomed, and she got odd 	notions, but didn't know how to implement them. It was frustrating."

	"I 	think I can appreciate that."

	"Then 	Harmony went. She's always second. She was there eight days, because 	there were more hours than Melody had realized, and aged four years 	before she reverted. She said she was a full-blown woman of sixteen, 	and loved it, but couldn't keep it when she left."

	'That 	was surely fortunate."

	She 	eyed him obliquely, "Perhaps, Then I went, and there were still 	more hours, and I was there ten days before catching up the hours, 	barely a day before they returned with the youth elixir so their 	regulars could return to work. So I was seventeen, in the full flush 	of lovely womanhood, before I reverted." She gazed at him. "My 	body returned to twelve, but my mind is seventeen. I actually lived 	those years, Cyrus, and the villagers told me I was pretty. I wanted 	you to know that."

	Cyrus 	did not find this reassuring. What could he say? "I suppose it 	does explain your maturity of outlook."

	"Yes. 	My girl body sometimes carries me away foolishly, but my mind is 	capable of much more, especially emotionally. I wish I could make 	you believe that."

	"I 	believe it," he said insincerely. This whole business made him 	profoundly uncertain. Had she been seventeen physically, and 	approached him like this—no, he must not go there.

	Now 	Rhythm turned and resumed walking, leading him along the path. "What 	is your ambition in life, Cyrus?"

	He 	laughed. "That is what brought me to the Good Magician's 	Castle. My father, Roland Robot, wanted me to become a leader of 	robots. My mother, Hannah Barbarian, wanted me to capture and marry 	a lovely wild-haired uncivilized woman. I couldn't reconcile the 	two, so I went to the Good Magician—and garbled my Question. 	And he told me my true ambition: to write and direct plays."

	"You 	could still be a leader and marry a lovely wild-haired rebellious 	woman."

	"Maybe. 	I do think I need to marry, because of this Two to the Fifth hint, I 	think it means that I need to become two by marrying the right 	woman,"

	The 	path opened out into the glade with the pond. "Isn't it 	pretty?" she asked as they came to stand by the water.

	"Yes." 	He was beginning to wonder what the point was. He was almost certain 	she had more in mind than just telling him about her timely 	experience,

	"It's 	a love spring."

	"A 	love spring!" he exclaimed, stepping back. "They're 	dangerous."

	"That 	depends,"

	It 	seemed best to change the subject again, "Now what did you want 	to tell me?"

	"About 	your conflicting ambitions: you could please both your parents."

	"I'm 	not sure how. Writing plays isn't the same as being a leader, and 	I'm beginning to think that there is no other woman quite like my 	mother. The other actresses—"

	"Who 	flirt shamelessly with you," she said, frowning.

	"Yes. 	But they are civilized women. None of them would do anything really 	wild."

	"You 	could marry a wild princess."

	He 	laughed, "You know, that would fulfill my parents' ambitions 	for me! I would become a leader by definition, and her wildness 	would thrill my mother. But there's one flaw in that idea."

	"What 	flaw?"

	"What 	princess would ever want to marry a cyborg Playwright?"

	She 	faced him squarely, "I would."

	"Theoretically, 	when you grow up, if your mature judgment didn't make you see the 	foolishness of it,"

	"No, 	Now."

	"You 	must be joking."

	"Look 	at my aura. It's right for you."

	So 	it was. "But—"

	"I 	have come to know you, Cyrus. I have a crush on you," she 	confessed, blushing again. "In fact it's more than a crush. I 	love you, and always will. I am old enough at seventeen to 	understand my feeling. I can see some aspects of the future, and 	know this for sure. I'd do anything you wanted me to, even if I 	don't understand it, age no barrier," She made a little 	gesture, as of" opening her shirt. "Please, 	Cyrus, take me. My body isn't quite there yet. but my spirit is." 	Her blush had become furious; she knew she was making a forbidden 	offer.

	He 	was appalled. "But you're 	a child!"

	Something 	faintly barbaric crossed her features. 	"Are you rejecting me, after I bared my secret heart to you?"

	"Of 	course I am. I would never touch a child. The Adult Conspiracy 	forbids it."

	"Even 	though you now know I'm really more like seventeen?"

	"You 	would have to be seventeen in mind and body, or more, to have any 	right to—to do what you ask. You're not,"

	"So 	it's like that," she said grimly. "Well, 	then we'll do it the hard way." She 	reached into a pocket.

	"Rhythm, 	you're making me nervous," he said, remembering again that she 	was a Sorceress. As he had been warned, any woman spurned was 	dangerous, and a Sorceress especially so, regardless of her age,

	"You 	should be." She brought out a little sphere. She bit into it. 	It puffed into vapor, surrounding her.

	Then 	the vapor cleared. Rhythm had activated another decade spell. Now 	she was twenty-two, lovely and wild-haired. "Oh, my," 	Cyrus breathed, awed by the transformation.

	"I'm 	not a child any more," she said, "Am I?"

	"N-No. 	But—"

	"Now 	I have much the same body I had at seventeen. This dress is way too 	tight," she said. She ripped it open and dropped it on the 	ground. Her bra and panties were splitting at the seams, and she 	ripped them off too, letting her abruptly mature body spring to its 	full unfettered dimensions. It wasn't just her flaming red hair that 	was wild; it was her whole personality. She stood resplendently, 	defiantly nude.

	Cyrus 	freaked out. He stood immobile, unable to rip his gaze from her 	remarkable body. It might exist only for an hour, but it overwhelmed 	him. This was the very image of his Perfect Woman, Doubly dangerous 	because he knew she was really a child, despite what she said. All 	he could do was gasp a single syllable. "No!"

	"I 	love you, Cyrus," she said. "My mature perspective doesn't 	change that. But it seems you don't love me. Fortunately I can do 	something about that."

	"No!" 	he repeated. What awful folly was she contemplating?

	She 	stepped into him, threw her arms about him. and kissed him. If he 	hadn't already been freaked out, this would have done it. She was 	the most exciting contact he'd ever had, thrilling him in all manner 	of illicit ways. Then she drew back slightly. "Are you quite 	sure you dont love me, Cyrus?"

	"No," 	he said weakly. But he wasn't sure how he meant it.

	"That 	can be taken two ways. So we'll make it one way." She clasped 	him tightly, half lifted him, and jumped into the pond, hauling him 	along with her. The love spring.

	Oh, 	no! Now they were both sprawled in the water, thoroughly soaked, and 	it was indeed conducive. Suddenly he was ardently loving her. To 	bleep with the awful guilt! He held her and kissed her avidly.

	"That's 	more like it," she said. "Fortunately I am unaffected by 	the spring, being already there." She kissed him back, 	passionately.

	Then 	somehow his clothing was off, and they were in the throes of utter 	abandon. He couldn't get enough of her, nor she of him.

	He 	wasn't sure how long the passion lasted, but finally they both 	dragged themselves out of the pond and lay panting on the bank. "Do 	you love me now, Cyrus?" she asked with two fifths of a smile.

	"I 	love you now and forever. Rhythm," he said. "I don't think 	you even needed the love spring. You won me with that first adult 	kiss."

	"That's 	nice," She rolled into him, and they clasped again. "I 	dreamed of doing this with you. Only I was too young to know the 	details, I might have suspected them at seventeen, but I lost that 	information when I reverted. I just wanted your complete devotion."

	"You 	have it," he said, kissing her. "But there's a problem."

	"I'll 	be twelve again, within the hour," she agreed.

	"You 	know this love can't be."

	"Unfortunately 	I do, now that I am conversant with the hidden details of the Adult 	Conspiracy. I was foolishly irresponsible. I won't remember those 	details when I revert, but I will still love you."

	"And 	I will still love you," he said with sadly mixed emotions. "But 	this love is forbidden."

	She 	nodded. "So we had better work it out now. while I still have 	my knowledge. I will forget the details, but you won't. I will still 	be more than willing to indulge those details, if you 	guide me."

	"No! 	I love you, but I can't do that."

	"I 	understand. You are an honorable man, which is one of the qualities 	I like about you. But will you let me kiss you, after I revert? You 	can just stay still, doing nothing, so you're not at fault."

	"I 	will be at fault if I let you," he said miserably. "Rhythm, 	I will want desperately to do everything with you, but I must not do 	anything. This is awful."

	She 	nodded again. "I did not work everything out, as a child. I was 	not equipped to. But I think I will remember that I did work them 	out as an adult, so will know that I have to leave you alone. We 	must tell no one of this tryst."

	"Yes! 	But Melete will know."

	"She 	will have the sense to ignore it."

	"Yes."

	"Suppose 	I sneak into your bed at night, and—"

	"No!" 	'

	"No," 	she echoed regretfully. "Bleep."

	He 	had to laugh. "At least we understand each other's pain. You 	will revert, we'll recover and patch up our clothing, and there will 	be nothing more between us. No one will know."

	"So 	that's settled," she agreed. "Anything else I want of you, 	I'll have to have now." She clasped him again, kissed him. and 	they had another desperate bout of passion.

	"I 	think the hour is about over," Cyrus said with infinite regret.

	"Yes. 	It is time to repair my outfit so that there is not an illicitly 	bare girl in your presence. Now that I am adult, I honor the Adult 	Conspiracy too." Then she looked past him. "What's what?"

	He 	followed her gaze. "It looks like a stork. It must be passing 	here coincidentally."

	"We 	did summon the stork," she reminded him. "Several times. 	Emphatically. I am now in a position to know."

	That 	was a coy understatement. They had probably jolted several storks 	out of their flight paths. "But they take at least nine months 	to deliver. This can't be ours."

	But 	the stork came in for a landing beside them. "Stymy Stork, at 	your service,'' he said. "I have a delivery for Princess 	Rhythm." He set down his bundle.

	Both 	of them stared at stork and bundle, stupefied,

	"I 	don't make many deliveries myself, these days,'' Stymy said. "But 	this one is special. Congratulations, Princess." He turned 	about, spread his wings, and took off.

	"It's 	impossible," Cyrus said. "There has to be a mistake."

	Rhythm 	reached for the bundle. She opened it. There was a precious baby 	girl in a basket. "Oh." Rhythm said, picking her up and 	holding her close. "She is mine. 	I know it. The stork works must have gotten confused and delivered 	her immediately."

	Cyrus 	looked at the basket. It contained several txjttles of milk, some 	diapers, and a sponge. The word "Kadence" was printed 	neatly on it. "She is Kadence," he said.

	"Of 	course, I always knew my daughter would be Kadence. Rhythm— 	Kadence. I just didn't expect her so soon." She picked up a 	bottle and started feeding the baby. "This comes so naturally."

	"But 	you're about to revert!"

	"Then 	you will have to take care of her," she said. "She's your 	baby too.' '

	"How 	will I ever explain a baby?"

	She 	smiled ruefully. "Consider it a challenge."

	Cyrus 	rescued his clothes from the love spring, and picked up the torn 	pieces of hers. "These won't be usable, for more than one 	reason. They're messed up. and mine are soaked with love elixir."

	"I'll 	make a spell," Rhythm said. She focused, her drum and 	drumsticks appeared, she beat a brief pattern, and in a moment both 	their outfits were repaired and dry, "You had better get 	dressed. I'll wait until I revert."

	"You 	remaining bare until then will drive me crazy."

	"Wonderful," 	she said. She glanced at the baby. "She's ready for a nap." 	She set Kadence back into her basket and gently covered her over. 	Then she turned to Cyrus.

	No 	words were spoken, lest they disturb the baby. They both knew what 	they wanted, and they went at it almost savagely, knowing that it 	was probably their last chance for it. He hoped that didn't bring 	another immediate delivery from the stork.

	"Something 	s odd," Cyrus said as he dressed.

	"Yes 	indeed," Rhythm said, startled.

	"It 	has been more than an hour, I'm sure, and you haven't reverted."

	"Kadence 	is growing."

	They 	looked at each other They had been talking of different things. "She 	is," Cyrus said, peeking into the basket.

	"And 	I haven't reverted," Rhythm said. "But by the position of 	the sun, it has been at least an hour."

	"This 	is remarkably strange," he said. "Could it relate to the 	way the Stork delivered so fast?"

	"I 	fear I messed up the spell. Or maybe our passion distorted it."

	"Or 	maybe using it on yourself changed it," he suggested,

	"That 	might be the case. But how would that account for the effects we're 	seeing?"

	"Suppose 	it is somehow accelerating? So that it didn't stop at a decade." 	He hesitated. "Rhythm, you're still beautiful, but you look 	older."

	She 	fetched a small mirror from somewhere. It couldn't have been a 	pocket, because she remained beautifully nude. "Oh, my! I am 	old! I look twenty-three or 	twenty-four!"

	Or 	twenty-five or -six. "If time is moving faster, it would mean 	that maybe the stork did take nine months to deliver the baby, and 	now she's a year or so older."

	Kadence 	woke, "Mommy!" she cried.

	They 	exchanged a startled look. Kadence was talking already.

	Rhythm 	went to lift Kadence out of the basket, but the child was already 	crawling over the rim on her own. She went on hands and knees, then 	got tired of that, and lifted unsteadily to her feet. She was 	walking!

	"Accelerated 	time," Rhythm said. "I did 	mess up that spell."

	As 	they watched, the child became steadier on her feet, visibly 	growing. She was now a toddler, two or three years old. She was 	wearing a little dress. Had that been in the basket too?

	"You're 	locked into adulthood," Cyrus said. "I love that, but it's 	dangerous. At this rate you'll soon grow too old for me."

	"I'll 	never be that!" But she looked worried.

	Meanwhile 	Kadence was walking up to Cyrus. "Daddy!" she said. "Pick 	me up.' '

	He 	picked her up. She was now three to four years old, a healthy child. 	"Can you nullify the spell?" he asked. "So that at 	least nobody ages rapidly any more?"

	"I 	don't know. I think I just have to cancel it."

	"Do 	it soon," he said. "I'd rather have you underage than 	dying of old age in minutes."

	"So 	would I," she agreed. "Let me concentrate." She beat 	lightly on the drum, her eyes closing.

	"What's 	mommy doing?" Kadence asked him.

	"She's 	trying to abolish a bad spell," he explained.

	'That's 	nice," the child said. She kissed his ear. "I love you, 	daddy."

	"I 	love you too, Kadence," he said, realizing it was true. His 	emotions were keeping pace with the accelerated passage of time.

	"Put 	me down, please daddy. I want to go help mommy."

	He 	lowered her to the ground. She was now five or six years old. 	"Hurry,'' he said ui;gently to Rhythm,

	"Got 	it," she said. "I garbled a parameter, so instead of 	terminating normally, it went into accelerator mode, I won't make 	ihat mistake 	again. Now to repair it so it can expire." She produced a 	sphere, and bit into it just before Kadence reached her. Vapor 	puffed out, surrounding her.

	In 	hardly more than a moment, it dissipated. There was Rhythm, twelve 	years old.

	Kadence 	stopped, a small swirl of mist passing by her. "Mother?" 	she asked doubtfully.

	Rhythm 	opened her mouth, but didn't speak, Cyrus knew why. What was she to 	say?

	He 	went to the child. "There was fouled-up magic," he 	explained. "It was making her get old quickly. She stopped it, 	and now she is young again."

	"I 	felt the magic," Kadence agreed, "It just touched me. It 	stopped me growing. Now I'm staying at six, aging normally."

	"Kadence, 	dear," Rhythm said as she got quickly into her clothes. "You 	were supposed to be with me for that spell. It would have—"

	The 	child was innocently wide-eyed. "Would have what, mother?"

	"Would 	have abolished you," Cyrus said with awful realization, "As 	it is, it merely returned you to a normal existence in your present 	form. I think."

	"I'll 	have to make another spell," Rhythm said. Her drum and 	drumsticks reappeared.

	Kadence 	clouded over. She was suffering a dreadful realization of her own. 	"Mother!

	Don't 	abolish me! I love you."

	Rhythm 	burst into tears, "I can't do it!" she said. The drum 	disappeared,

	"We 	can't do it," Cyrus said. "The 	magic stops here." Then he hugged Rhythm and Kadence together. 	All three of them cried with mixed love and relief. Whatever the 	future was, they would face it together.

	But 	what a complicated mess it was! An adult father, a twelve- (possibly 	seventeen-) year-old mother, and a six-year-old child. How could any 	of that be explained?





	Chapter 8: Kadence


	Father, 	what's going on?" Kadence asked bravely. "Please tell me 	the truth,' '

	Cyrus 	looked at Rhythm, who made a token nod. She was leaving it up to 	him, the adult.

	Cyrus 	tackled it as well as he could. Absolute candor seemed to be 	required. "Your mother Princess Rhythm is a Sorceress," he 	explained to the little girl. "She fell in love with me, but 	she's only twelve years old. So she made a spell to make her older, 	and we did Adult Conspiracy things, but the spell was wrong and the 	stork delivered you.' '

	"You 	didn't want me?" The child's eyes were brimming pools.

	"We 	know we do, now. but we didn't expect you so soon. Normally both 	parents are of age, and even then the stork takes much of another 	year to deliver. This happened unusually fast. So we were surprised, 	that's all."

	"Okay."

	But 	the worst was coming. "Now your mother is twelve again, and we 	can't be seen together, because other folk would not understand. We 	love each other, and we love you, but they would think we did 	something wrong."

	"Wrong, 	Father?"

	This 	was not getting easier. 'They would think that Rhythm was only 	twelve when we signaled the stork for you. and that would be wrong. 	She was twenty-two, but only for an hour or so. It is far too 	complicated to explain to them. So we can't admit that we did it."

	"Then 	what about me?"

	Exactly. 	"Neither can we acknowledge you as our six-year-old daughter; 	they would really not 	understand that. So we need you to pretend you're Rhyme's little 	sister, at least for now."

	"Rhyme?"

	"That's 	what she is called by others, who don't know she is actually a 	princess. There is reason for keeping it secret; she might be in 	danger if others knew."

	"Oh." 	'

	Did 	she really understand? He had to hope so. "In time Rhythm will 	be old enough, and then I'll marry her, and we'll recognize you as 	our daughter Can you handle that?"

	"Roles," 	Kadence said, brightening, "These are roles."

	"Exactly. 	We'll even give you a part in a play, another role."

	Kadence 	clapped her hands together gleefully, "I'll do it. Father,"

	"Call 	me Cyrus, please. For the role."

	"Oh, 	yes. This is fun."

	"But 	apart from our roles," he concluded, "we do love you, and 	you really are our daughter,"

	"That's 	what counts," Kadence said, satisfied,

	"There 	is something else," Rhythm said. "All of the members of my 	lineage have Magician-caliber magic talents. You surely do too. Do 	you know what your talent is?"

	"No. 	Mother."

	"Call 	me Rhyme."

	"No, 	Rhyme." The child was a quick study, fortunately.

	"That's 	all right. Sometimes it takes many years to discover one's talent. 	We know you have one, and at some point you will find out what it 	is. When you do, be very careful, because some people aren't easy 	about Sorceresses. Try to learn it and practice it by yourself. 	Never use it to hann anyone who isn't trying to harm you."

	"I 	won't, Mother I mean. Rhyme."

	They 	walked back along the path, away from the love spring. Cyrus knew 	Rhythm had artfully trapped him, then run afoul of the complications 	of her own magic, but he didn't mind. He loved her, and her aura was 	right. He suspected that he had always been destined to love her; 	she had merely pushed the cadence, no pun. In time they would be a 	happy family.

	When 	they came close to the camp. Rhythm took Kadence by the hand, while 	Cyrus took a separate route. Their new roles were about to be 	established.

	Melete 	was waiting for him like an annoyed mother. "Where have you 	be—" She broke off, reading his 	mind. "Oh, my, Cyrus! This is a pickle-ment."

	"It 	would never have happened, if you had been along." he said. 	"Yet I'm glad it did. She is the 	one for me."

	"Whom 	you can neither marry nor acknowledge," she said severely. "I 	wish you had been more careful."

	Careful? 	He had been literally swept off his feet. "What's done is done. 	My main problem now is that I hate being away from them. Either of 	them. I love them both, in different ways."

	"I 	appreciate that," she said tiredly. "Well, we'll make the 	best of it. 'Vou have revisions to make on the play."

	"My 	private life has become more like a story than the play."

	"Yes, 	of course ."

	He 	sat down at the desk to work on the play, but he just couldn't 	concentrate. All he could think of was Rhythm and Kadence. What was 	he to do?

	Melete 	threw up her hands. "We'll have to sort this out somehow. All 	right. Princess; come here.''

	Rhythm 	appeared, with Kadence in tow. "We just can't function without 	him,'' she said apologetically to Melete.

	"Neither 	can he without you," Melete said. "When you soak in a love 	spring, and it's buttressed by real love, it's impossible to live 	apart."

	"Yet 	we can't even touch each other," Cyrus said dolefully.

	"That's 	the bleep of it," Rhythm agreed. "I'm too young to do what 	I can't even imagine doing with him. and I know he won't do it. But 	I long to do it anyway, I know it's the complete expression of our 	love. Curse the Conspiracy!"

	They 	looked at each other with sheer guilty longing. What had been could 	never be.

	"This 	is why the Adult Conspiracy exists," Melete said severely. "So 	children won't get themselves into exactly the kind of trouble you 	did. Your parents will utterly freak out."

	"Don't 	tell my parents!" Rhythm cried, horrified.

	"I 	won't," Melete said. "You 	will. When necessary."

	"I'm 	ashamed," Cyrus said, wishing he could embrace Rhythm. "I'm 	supposed to be the adult."

	"I'm 	ashamed too," Rhythm agreed. She met his gaze, reading his 	mind. "And I wish the same."

	"You 	both should be, after that stunt! You should have known better."

	"We 	do know better," Cyrus said. "Now."

	"Yet 	we would do it again, if we could," Rhythm said. "Any 	time."

	They 	continued to gaze at each other. The forbidden longing became almost 	unbearable, Cyrus saw tears in Rhythm's eyes, and felt his own tears 	starting.

	"You're 	both crazy," Kadence said severely.

	Melete 	glanced at her, startled. "You have a solution?" It was 	evident that she could be seen and heard by others when she chose to 	be, "Despite knowing nothing about what they secretly long to 	do?"

	"Sure. 	Mother just has to make another Decade spell, a good one that won't 	go wrong, and be with him for an hour, doing I have no idea what. 	But then they won't be so sad."

	Cyrus 	exchanged a burning glance with Rhythm.

	Melete 	sighed. "Kadence, put me in your pocket," she said, "We'll 	take a walk around outside and get to know each other better,"

	"Sure," 	the girl agreed cheerfully. She picked up the Muse, and went 	outside.

	"Our 	daughter understands more than she should," Rhythm said as she 	brought out a sphere,

	"She 	understands that we desperately love each other."

	Rhythm 	bit the sphere. The vapor puffed. She became beautifully adult, "Oh, 	beloved!" she exclaimed, rushing into his arms.

	It 	was an intensely satisfying session, guilt and all.

	After 	their furious passion had been satisfied, they talked, loving each 	other's company regardless of the whereabouts of storks. "I 	loved you from the moment I first saw you," Rhythm confessed.

	"I 	couldn't let myself love you. Because—"

	She 	put a finger to his lips. "I understand. I felt you fighting 	against it. 'Winsome' was a euphemism." Her vocabulary matched 	her body, full fleshed,

	"It 	was," he agreed. "But I must say, when you became adult, 	you were surprisingly apt. You had no experience; how could you have 	known so perfectly what to do? You had no hesitation 	at all."

	"I 	shouldn't tell you," she said teasingly.

	"Tell 	me, or I'll tickle your lovely ribs. Like this." He touched one 	rib with one finger.

	"Eeek!" 	she screamed, laughing. "Dont you dare!"

	He 	held the rest of his fingers threateningly. "I will 	dare. Tell!"

	"I'll 	tell! I'll tell!" she cried, vanquished. "But first a bit 	of background."

	The 	three Princesses had always been excruciatingly curious about the 	secrets of the Adult Conspiracy, but of course no one would tell 	them. Melody was the pretty, charming one; she tried to charm adults 	into telling, but they didn't. Harmony was the agreeable one; she 	tried to make them want to tell, but they didn't. Rhythm was the 	bold, wild one, the little savage; she was the one that came up with 	the naughty idea.

	They 	made two dolls, a boy and a girl, as correct in details as they 	could. That meant that the girl was perfect, as girls were, while 	the boy was somewhat fuzzy in the midsection. Then they put the 	dolls together They discovered that the dolls could do just about 	anything with each other. He could put his nose in her ear; she 	could put her finger in his mouth. But there was one thing he could 	absolutely not put in one part of her So by elimination they knew 	that was it. How that could signal a stork remained a mystery.

	Then 	they took turns invoking the Decade spell. But the one who became 	mature would not tell the others the rest of the secret, and could 	not remember it when she reverted. Still, what she avoided answering 	when closely questioned was indicative. By the time they had been 	through it three times—once for each of them—they had a 	little bit of a notion what it was all about. But they knew they 	would have to do it with a real man in order to fathom the last of 	it.

	"And 	so I did," Rhythm concluded. "I didn't know exactly how, 	but I knew you did, and I followed your lead. After the first time, 	the mystery was gone, and I had no further problem." She 	smiled. "Except when I reverted, of course."

	"Do 	you really forget those details?" he asked, guiltily curious.

	"I 	am a wild, naughty, unseemly girl. My parents would be appalled if 	they even suspected. So of course I can't confess anything like 	that." She loosed a smoldering sidelong glance at him. "Does 	that dismay you?"

	"Certainly. 	I am outraged. You are a perfect, deceptive barbarian, inside." 	He held her close. "Exactly the kind of girl I longed for. The 	kind my mother would approve of. I love your wildness."

	"I 	always wanted to be loved for my wildness," she said, kissing 	him wildly as her hair flared out similarly. And of course the 	passion took them again. It was wonderful.

	The 	hour ended and she reverted. She hastily dressed while he averted 	his gaze so as not to compromise the Adult Conspiracy. But they 	couldn't honor it perfectly; they kissed once more before 	separating.

	"Same 	time tomorrow?" he inquired.

	"If 	not before,'' she agreed. "You know, if I concentrated, I might 	almost remember some details."

	"Don't 	do that!" he said, alarmed.

	Then 	they laughed together It had become a private joke. How could either 	of them ever forget the fulfillment of their love? Regardless of 	details, they had a solution of sorts to their dilemma,

	Kadence 	and Melete returned, "There are fun people here. Rhyme," 	the girl said. "Even an ugly old witch with a pointy hat."

	"To 	be sure, little sister," Rhythm said. "Now let's leave 	poor Cyrus to his work. I fear I have worn him out."

	"He 	doesn't look very worn," Kadence said.

	"I 	conceal my fatigue well," Cyrus said. He changed the subject. 	"I'm glad you enjoyed your exploration of the camp."

	Rhythm 	glanced at the child sharply. "Your hair!" It had been cut 	halfway short.

	"It 	was all straggly with loose ends," Kadence said. "As if I 	inherited some barbarian blood."

	"You 	did," Cyrus and Rhythm said together.

	"But 	Crabapple helped me tame it. She used her pincers to trim the ends 	so they are even, not straggly. Now it looks nice. She's great."

	"She 	is a worthy person," Cyrus agreed. "We hope she will do 	well as an actfess."

	"We 	certainly do," Rhythm agreed. Cyrus knew she was aware of his 	own passing interest in the woman, which had abruptly and 	permanently ended. "Now we really must go."

	Kadence 	set Melele back on the table, and mother and daughter disappeared. 	No one had seen Rhythm come here, because she hadn't walked in, but 	conjured herself in magically.

	"Kadence 	is a nice girl," Melete said. "She wants so much to help 	Crabapple, but doesn't know how."

	"I 	want to help her too, and not just because I need Rhythm to be 	reassured she's no threat. It would be nice if she truly succeeds as 	an actress. But I fear the part I crafted for her isn't enough."

	"So 	we will make it enough," Melete said, "Put your rear in 	the chair."

	Cyrus 	sat down at the table. This time, with Melete's help, he was able to 	focus on the play with only occasional distractions.

	The 	troupe was growing. Dusty Dust Devil joined, reuniting with his 	sister Dusti. On occasion the two would go out and stir up a 	horrendous swirl of dust. But both worked hard at the play.

	There 	was also Guise, a young man who happened by and was promptly 	co-opted by the actresses. His talent was to make clothing that made 	its wearer resemble whatever creature it emulated. The effect was 	illusory, but that was tine for the play. He was drafted to assume 	the lead male role, freeing Cyrus to direct, Xina was especially 	taken with him. and he with her, as they acted out the pseudo 	romance in the play. In the play, he went finally to Crabapple, but 	in life he stayed with Xina.

	In 	addition, the Witch flew back to the Good Magician's Castle and 	recruited Tuff, the rock salesman, because they needed his talent to 	make the raised stage and chairs for the audience. Exactly how she 	persuaded him to join the troupe Cyrus did not inquire, but 	thereafter he shared a tent with her. Cyrus knew how extremely 	persuasive women could be, when they wanted to be.

	The 	modifications and rehearsals continued. There seemed to be an 	endless array of minor details that had to be settled before they 	could make their first 	official presentation. Cyrus found it frankly .somewhat dull. Also, 	the actresses no longer flirted with him. Somehow they knew that he 	had been taken, though he was sure they did not know by whom or in 	what manner He was sure because both Melete and Rhythm assured him 	it was so, 	reading their minds. That was a relief, but it also was a slight 	disappointment. Had it not been for the private sessions with 	decade-aged Rhythm, he would have been unduly bored.

	However, 	there was Kadence. She had joined the troupe as Rhyme's younger 	sister, and was doing her best to be helpful. The 	actors and actresses liked her. In the 	guise of encouraging her to learn acting, he was able to be with her 	without suspicion.

	He 	came upon her sitting on the ground, staring intently down. "Are 	you all right?" he asked.

	"Oh. 	sure, Cyrus," she replied. "I'm just watching ants. I 	didn't know they marched in regular 	columns."

	"They 	don't, normally," he said. He joined her, looking down. There 	were the ants in perfect formation, as if marching to a common 	drummer.

	Drummer. 	This was Kadence. surely a variation of cadence, A cadence was a 	measured sound, a rhythmic progression. Folk marching to a drumbeat 	had cadence, as he understood it. Did the ants have cadence? If so, 	could it be related to her name?

	"Kadence, 	try focusing on the ants not marching in step," he suggested. 	"See what happens."

	"Okay, 	Cyrus." She was being very careful never to call him daddy or 	father, and he appreciated that. She focused on the formation.

	Immediately 	the ants broke into a tangled mess of nothing coherent. All signs of 	their formation was gone.

	"Ooo, 	ugh," she said, and concentrated again.

	The 	ants re-formed their formation. They were back in step.

	"Kadence, 	I believe we have discovered your magic talent," he said, 	pleased. "You can make things have a cadence. To hear a common 	beat, as it were, and move in formation. The ants are doing it 	because you are making them do it."

	"Wow," 	she said, surprised. "Is that good?"

	"It's 	not good or bad; it's magic. Every person has a magic talent of some 	sort, and this must be yours. The talent of organization. 	Coordinating others efficiently. Some talents are stronger than 	others."

	"Is 	this strong?"

	He 	had to be honest with her. "It does not seem like a really 	strong talent. But talents can be deceptive. Some that seem slight 	can actually be quite strong. Much depends on the way you develop 	it, and the use you make of it.' '

	"I'm 	supposed to have a strong talent."

	He 	shrugged. He did not see much potential here, but according to 	Rhythm, Kadence was destined to be a Sorceress. "Maybe you can 	learn more about yours, and enable it lo become strong. It will take 	practice,"

	"I'll 	practice."

	"Be 	sure to tell your sister Rhyme about it. She may be able lo help."

	"I 	will."

	Three 	actresses were approaching, Kadence gazed at them intently. They got 	in step.

	Cyrus 	made a silent whistle. "Are you doing that?" he whispered.

	"Shouldn't 	I?"

	"Maybe 	be careful with people. They might not like it."

	"Okay." 	The actresses fell out of step.

	"With 	luck, they won't have noticed," Cyrus murmured. Indeed, the 	three walked on by, paying him no attention.

	"Is 	it good, Cyrus?"

	"It 	is stronger than doing it with ants, yes. We need to discover what 	else you can do."

	"I'll 	work on it, Cyrus," she said, pleased.

	It 	was time to put on the first play, Curtis made arrangements with 	Crabapple's village, and it was scheduled.

	Then 	things started to go wrong. Guise had done well with the costumes, 	but had not had much time in the part, and tended to forget his 	lines at key moments. That would never do.

	"We 	need a prompter," Curtis said.

	"A 	what?" Cyrus asked blankly.

	"A 	person who follows the play, and prompts the actors when they 	falter. I should have remembered before."

	It 	seemed like a good idea. "Who can do it?"

	"Anyone 	with a script. But some are better than others. We'd better have 	spot rehearsals for the position.

	They 	did. Dusty tried it, but tended to blow the lines. That was worse 	than no prompter.

	Aero 	was willing, but tended to excerpt letters from key words. That 	didn't work either.

	"Try 	Kadence," Melete suggested.

	"But 	she's a child." Cyrus winced internally as he said it. 	remembering what had happened the last time he accused a girl of 	being a child.

	"She's 	a likely Sorceress with a talent for alignment."

	So 	they tried Kadence, and she was perfect. She didn't even need a 	script, which helped, because she had not yet learned how to read. 	She had memorized all the parts just from hearing them rehearsed and 	corrected.

	Tuff 	made a small chamber of stone and set it into the ground at the 	front of the stage. Kadence sat in it, facing the stage; the 	audience could not see her, as it was on the other side of the 	stone. "Now forget a line," Cyrus told Guise.

	He 	faced Xina. "I want to—to—"

	"Marry 	you," Kadence whispered promptly.

	"Marry 	you," he said, remembering the line.

	She 	would do. She had found her role in the play.

	Another 	problem was food. The group had pretty well foraged out the local 	pie plants and other natural sources, and were tired of the Witch's 	sandwiches and brews. They needed a new, independent supply. There 	were increasing complaints, and actresses were getting 	female-doggish, which spoiled morale. But how could they tackle this 	piX)blem, when they had the play to perfect? They couldn't afford a 	serious distraction.

	Rhythm 	got on it, in her fashion. Melete was the one who gave her the 	notion. "Dear, we need you here, for reasons we can't say 	openly."

	"So 	I shouldn't mention things like the man and daughter I love, because 	I'm too young to know the proper meaning of the word, or the way I 	keep my identity clouded from the others?"

	"Exactly," 	the Muse agreed with just a bit more than half a smile. "Don't 	refer to them at all, beyond the privacy of this tent. So I think 	this is an occasion where your sisters might be able and willing to 	assist."

	"Melody 	and Harmony!" she exclaimed. "I miss them."

	"But 	we shall have to conceal certain things from them, lest word reach 	parental ears prematurely."

	Rhythm 	quailed. "They'll know."

	"Then 	we must persuade them to keep the secret, at least for the time 	being."

	"Maybe 	that will work. They love secrets."

	"Then 	summon them now."

	Rhythm 	produced her drum and drumsticks. She made a brief patter.

	Instantly 	two cutely crowned girls arrived. One wore a nice green dress, had 	green/blond hair, and blue eyes. The other had brown dress, hair, 	and eyes. Both had somewhat impish expressions, as if about to 	participate in something funny.

	"You 	called, sister?" the first inquired.

	"Or 	drummed us up?" the other added.

	"Meet 	my triplet sisters. Melody and Harmony," Rhythm said.

	"Hello, 	Princesses," Cyrus said formally.

	The 	two gazed at him with disturbingly aware expressions. He realized 	that they could probably read minds, the way Rhythm could. He tried 	to banish any thoughts of the true situation.

	The 	two turned as one to Rhythm, "Ooo, you've been naughty," 	Melody said, delighted.

	"Extremely 	naughty," Harmony agreed, smirking,

	"Bleep!" 	Rhythm swore. "I never even showed my panties."

	"You 	went beyond panties," Melody said,

	"Way 	beyond panties," Harmony agreed. "Or inside them, as the 	case may be."

	Rhythm, 	clearly overmatched, played her trump. 	"This is my daughter, Kadence." 	Kadence appeared beside her.

	This 	shut them up, momentarily stunned.

	"Hi. 	Aunt Melody," Kadence said politely. "Hi, Aunt Harmony."

	Melody 	found her voice. "But she's—"

	"Six 	years old," Harmony said.

	"It's 	complicated," Rhythm said.

	They 	regrouped. "You will tell us everything," Melody said.

	"Especially 	including the forbidden details," Harmony agreed.

	"First 	you must agree to keep the secret," Rhythm said.

	The 	two exchanged a knowing glance, "On one condition," Melody 	said.

	"We 	get to kiss him, once," Harmony said.

	"What?" 	Cyrus exclaimed.

	Rhythm 	looked pained. "We do need their help, Cyrus."

	He 	realized that he had to go along with their mischief. They were 	after all Sorceresses, dangerous to offend, "Once," he 	agreed weakly. "But that must be secret, because—"

	Suddenly 	Princess Melody was embracing him. "Because this, too, is," 	she said, and kissed him firmly on the 	mouth. The impact of it was half stunning. He remembered that her 	mind was actually fifteen.

	Then 	her blue eyes became brown, and it was Harmony holding him. "A 	violation of the Adult Conspiracy," she said, and kissed him 	equally firmly. That impact was the other half stunning; her mind 	was sixteen. He fell back on his bed, unable to orient. But already 	he understood that Rhythm was not so much of a maverick after all; 	her sisters were equivalently naughty and daring, after allowing for 	their mental ages. Sorceresses, all.

	Kadence 	came to join him. "They're just teasing you. Father," she 	said, taking his hand. That helped.

	"Now 	you've done it," Rhythm said grimly. "You're both in it 	too. We're all in violation."

	"So 	none of us will tell," Melody said.

	"Any 	of this," Harmony agreed. "Now out with it, sister. We are 	already good and jealous."

	"First, 	we need to find a way to provide plenty of varied food for the 	troupe," Rhythm said firmly.

	The 	other two sighed, together. "Very well, let's focus," 	Melody said.

	"On 	that problem," Harmony agreed.

	'Then 	I'll cover the rest," Rhythm concluded.

	They 	put their heads together. Cyrus felt an intensity of magic expanding 	outward. It was breathtakingly strong. He remembered that any one 	Princess was a Sorceress, and any two squared it, and the three 	together cubed it. If he hadn't believed that before, he certainly 	did now.

	Then 	it collapsed. "Jim will be here tomorrow," Melody 	announced.

	"His 	talent is making food," Harmony added.

	"Which 	will solve our problem," Rhythm concluded. Then she told her 	sisters what had happened, abbreviating only the details of stork 	summoning, which inhibited her at this age.

	Cyrus, 	Kadence, and Melete merely listened, finding the dialogue 	interesting despite their familiarity with the subject. The 	Princesses had their own take on its aspects.

	At 	last, satisfied, Melody and Harmony gave Cyrus a knowing look, and 	vanished. They had come, helped, and learned the full naughty 	secret, and would not tell. Rhythm seemed satisfied, and relieved.

	She 	came to him after that, as Melete and Kadence elected to take their 	walk. Abruptly a decade older, she was 	especially amorous. He gladly indulged her Yet Cyrus had the uneasy 	feeling that someone was watching. The two sisters, surely, snooping 	on what was forbidden. He doubted he could do anything about it, so 	he did his best to ignore it. Maybe it was just his imagination.

	"Not 	even a Sorceress can balk a Sorceress," Rhythm said. "Let 	alone two Sorceresses."

	"I'm 	sure I don't know what you're talking about," he said, kissing 	hen.

	"Of 	course you don't," she agreed, kissing him back. "But the 	Adult Conspiracy will fuzz the details."

	He 	hoped so.

	Next 	day, Jim arrived, coincidentally, he thought. He could make any kind 	of food magically, in any amount. But in a land where pies grow on 	trees and beer formed in the thick trunks of other trees, there had 	been very little demand for his talent. Now he stumbled into a camp 	where they welcomed him. It was instant mutual appreciation. 	Thereafter each member of the troupe had whatever food he or she 	liked, whenever and in any amount liked.

	Aero 	seemed to take an interest in him. It seemed that Jim would not be 	sleeping alone long.

	The 	day before the presentation, Cyrus, Curtis, Tuff, the Witch, and 	Kadence walked to the neighborhood and surveyed the site selected 	for the play. It was in the center of the village, with space for 	people to stand or sit all around it. "Make a raised stone 	stage here, of this size." the Curse Friend told Tuff. "A 	dressing room here."

	"But 	Guise makes their clothing right on them,'' Kadence said. "They 	won't need to change."

	Curtis 	smiled. "Trust me, child, they will need privacy. Actors are a 	temperamental lot; they get nervous before a presentation."

	"Nervous?"

	"Sick 	to their tummies," the Witch explained. "They may even 	toss their cookies."

	'They'll 	be eating cookies?"

	Melete 	intervened. She was in Cyrus's pocket. "This is Adult slang,'' 	she explained. "She means they'll vomit."

	The 	child burst out laughing. "Oh, that's funny!"

	"Not 	to the actors," the Witch said, smiling wickedly. She had not 	heard Melete, of course.

	"Privacy," 	Curtis repeated. "Better have two potties, and a mop."

	Kadence 	tried to stifle her giggles. The men smiled.

	"And 	the prompter's booth here," Curtis continued after slightly 	more than a moment, "With a circular stage, some of the 	audience will see her, but that won't matter, they'll understand."

	"Can 	I wave to them?" Kadence asked.

	Curtis 	winced. "Please don't wave. This is a serious play."

	She 	looked mirthfully disappointed.

	Tuff 	conjured blocks of greenish volcanic stone magically and formed a 	raised stage together with a pinkish changing room complete with 	brown stone potties. It looked very pretty.

	"Of 	course the stone won't remain for more than three days,'' he said. 	"My talent is to borrow it from old volcanoes, not to keep it."

	"That 	is fine," Curtis said. "The villagers wouldn't want our 	stage cluttering their territory indefinitely."

	They 	returned to their camp for the night. Cyrus was excited; the big 	event was almost at hand.

	Next 	afternoon, even before the play, several actors were daunted by the 	expectant audience of villagers. They suffered butterflies and 	butter-spiders in their innards, and made copious use of the 	facilities. Crabapple was especially nervous, because she wasn't 	sure how the folk who had known her all her life would react to her 	role as an actress. But they all rallied bravely in time for the 	presentation.

	Guise 	walked out, garbed as a handsome young man, which he happened to be; 	his costume merely made him more so. He approached the Witch's 	Garden.

	The 	Witch rose up to face him, fairly radiating ire. Her costume made 	her more dramatically witchly than she had ever been in life, 	despite being authentic. "You—" she started. And 	stalled,

	"Clumsy 	oaf," Kadence whispered from the prompter's box.

	"Clumsy 	oaf!" the Witch screamed, "You just squished my Bleeding 	Heart Orchid!" The audience never knew that the brief pause had 	been a mental blanking of her line.

	Guise 	opened his mouth. "I—I—"

	"I'm 	sorry," Kadence whispered.

	"I'm 	sorry." he agreed. "I didn't 	see—"

	"Didn't 	see? Didn't see?" the 	Witch screeched, having no more trouble 	now that she was fairly started. She went 	on to curse him with Feeling Sight.

	Cyrus, 	watching from the edge, saw the audience become expectantly 	confused. They did not 	know what Feeling Sight was, but were 	sure it would soon turn out to be awful.

	In 	due course Guise encountered Aero, in her marvelously nicely skimpy 	outfit, surrounded by greenish light. It was a very nice effect, and 	the audience clearly liked gazing at her body. He got his lines out. 	but she stood frozen.

	"One 	for what?" Kadence whispered.

	That 	got her started, and she completed her lines. Meanwhile the 	audience, seeing her glow, was beginning to catch on.

	Guise 	realized that he couldn't marry the wrong color glow, and went on to 	Dusti, whose glow was pink. She, too, was beautifully costumed, but 	lost her line and had to be prompted.

	After 	her, Xina, glowing blue, the 	prettiest yet, also needed prompting. So 	did Crabapple, who could barely force herself to go out onto the 	stage. In fact, the only one who didn't need it was Tuff, the least 	experienced actor. But apart from that, it went well, and the 	audience never knew. It shuddered when the Witch formed her plot, 	and screamed when the feather boa struck, and cheered when Crabapple 	cut it away, and cried when she married Guise herself. She was of 	course the female lead, and her nervousness lent her a quality that 	enhanced her role and made her almost eerily beautiful.

	The 	applause at the end was long 	and loud. They made Crabapple return to 	the stage several times. She was crying so 	hard that she couldn't see, and Guise had to guide her by the elbow, 	but they were joyful tears. She had returned to her village as a 	success.

	As 	it turned out, the other actors were crying too. It was a great 	event.

	"They 	have been bloodied," Curtis said with satisfaction. "They 	will perform better in the future."

	There 	was an atmosphere of camaraderie as the troupe returned to the camp. 	They had performed together and made it work. And Kadence was the 	minor hero of the day, for her apt prompting.

	Only 	later did Cyrus 	figure it out. "That applause wasn't natural," he said.

	"Kadence 	did it," 	Melete agreed. "She wanted Crabapple to be appreciated,"

	"Kadence 	did it?"

	"Her 	talent is aligning people and things to the beat, the cadence," 	Melete said. "During the play she aligned each faltering actor 	to the play script, so that there would be no more blanks. Then 	toward the end she focused on the audience, causing the people to 	applaud together, especially for Crabapple. They did not realize 	they were guided."

	"My 	daughter really is a 	Sorceress," he said. awed. The notion was just a bit 	frightening. He had already seen what a Sorceress could do.





	Chapter 9: Violation


	Cyrus 	was struggling to write his second play, titled "The Dream," 	with Melete's assistance. He was discovering that even with the help 	of the Muse, the story did not necessarily flow.

	"Writing 	is ten percent inspiration, ninety percent perspiration," she 	reminded him. "You need to perspire. If I do it all for you, 	you'll never become a great Playwright in your own right."

	"I 	appreciate your consideration," he said, not appreciating it at 	all.

	"It's 	for your own good," she said sulkily. The problem with her was 	that she understood him too well.

	"Sure." 	He concentrated, getting little or nowhere. So he had a great title; 	what next? Should it feature a night marc who brought a good dream 	instead of a bad dream? He had the suspicion that had been done 	before. In fact he seemed to remember Night Mare Imbrium getting 	tired for it. That had been an injustice to her; she was simply a 	nice creature,

	Tliank 	you. Then with a flick of her tail she 	was gone.

	Oops. 	He had been daydreaming.

	The 	day was late, and Rhythm arrived before he 	knew it.

	"She 	just can't get enough 	of you," Melete murmured. "This time set me on the table 	so I can watch."

	"I 	never took you for a voyeur," Cyrus told her, smiling. Rhythm's 	visits always cheered him up.

	"I'm 	not. I'm merely jealous. She can distract you from your writing 	without even trying."

	'That's 	the joy of it," Rhythm said.

	Melete 	was jealous of his passion for Rhythm? That might explain why she 	was making him work so hard. But it was 	true that he never thought about plays when with Rhythm.

	The 	paper appeared in midair between them just as Rhythm was about to 	invoke the Decade spell. She grabbed it before it drifted to the 	floor. She read it:

	"violation. 	You have been charged with Violation of 	the Adult Conspiracy. Report to the Stork Works in forty-eight hours 	for the hearing. Fail not, on pain of penalty."

	She 	stared at him, aghast. "Cyrus! They're charging you with—"

	"Well, 	I'm guilty," he said, horrified.

	"No 	you aren't! I have always been twenty-two for you, except when I was 	even older."

	He 	shook his head. "Your true age is twelve. I knew it. The Decade 	spell is like an Accommodation spell, making it possible for two 	folk to get together who have 	no business being together in that manner. I must pay the penalty, 	whatever it is."

	She 	shook her head. "That might be the abolition of Kadence."

	He 	sank back on the bed. "That would be unbearable,"

	"Melete, 	what can we do?" Rhythm asked the Muse,

	"You 	will just have to persuade the stork 	authorities that you were of age when the stork was signaled, and 	when the baby was delivered." Melete said.

	"Well, 	we were," Rhythm 	said,

	"But 	their records may not show it, understandably."

	Rhythm 	nodded. "Yes, that could be the case. Once we explain, they'll 	understand. I hope."

	Cyrus 	hoped so too. "It says to report there within forty-eight 	hours. I don't even know where the Stork Works is."

	"I 	can find it," Rhythm said. "But—"

	"But 	you don't want to give away your nature by helping me get there 	magically," Cyrus said.

	"The 	notice should have instructions," Melete said.

	Rhythm 	looked. "Oh, yes. I didn't read that far before. It says there 	will be a pastel-colored line showing a safe way." She looked 	around. "Oh, I see it now! It leads right out of the tent."

	"But 	I can't go right now," Cyrus protested. "The play—"

	"Will 	keep," Melete said. "Better than you will, if you don't 	make that hearing."

	"What 	would be the penalty?" he asked.

	"It 	could be anything from banishment from Xanth to abolition of your 	child."

	"No!" 	Rhythm cried, "We already know we can't allow that."

	But 	the notion clung to Cyrus like burning tar "Kadence! We can't 	let her be abolished."

	"So 	you will make that hearing," Melete said firmly. "Tell 	Curtis you have an urgent appointment and will be back in four days. 	Rhythm will help cover for you."

	"The 	bleep I will," Rhythm said. "I'm going with him, I'm not 	going to let them banish him."

	"Then 	who will watch out for Kadence?" Melete asked evenly.

	That 	faint bit of barbarian wildness played across Rhythm's face. "We 	had better take her too. She has a right to speak, if she faces 	extinction. But I'm not going to let that happen, even if I have to 	do something rash."

	Cyrus 	realized that her dangerous Sorceress aspect was coming into play. 	He loved it. Even the Stork Works should be wary of crossing this 	girl, "I agree. But how can we explain the three of us 	departing together?"

	"I 	will cast a small believing spell as you tell Curtis," Rhythm 	said grimly.

	"That 	works," he agreed.

	He 	went immediately to see the producer Curtis offered no objection. 	"Just return with inspiration for the next play. We have a 	schedule to keep."

	"We'll 	keep it," Cyrus agreed.

	Next 	he talked to Don Donkey. '"You have been faithfully and quietly 	guarding my tent all this time," he said. "Now I need you 	to do more."

	"We're 	going somewhere," Don said.

	"I 	am. You're not, I need you to stay here and keep an eye on things 	for me.' '

	"Hee 	haw!" the donkey laughed. "As if I have any authority."

	"I'm 	serious. I need to know that nothing goes wrong here while I'm away. 	So you can walk around the camp, keeping your eyes open, and I'll 	look through them every so often to see what you're seeing. You can 	also give me verbal reports."

	"I'd 	rather travel."

	"Maybe 	next time."

	"Grumble."

	"Hee 	haw," Cyrus laughed.

	They 	found Kadence. "Come with us," Rhythm said. "It's 	important."

	The 	child didn't ai;gue. She respected her mother, more than ever since 	discovering the powers of Sorcery.

	Soon 	they were following the pastel line out of the camp, Cyrus had some 	trouble seeing it at first, so Rhythm enhanced it with a spell so 	that both he and Kadence could see it clearly. That way there would 	never be any doubt about their route.

	"But 	you know, Kadence," Rhythm said as they walked. "When we 	camp tonight—"

	"Oh, 	I know. You can put a sleep spell on me so you can do naughty things 	with Father,"

	"Are 	you sure you have no idea what they are?" Rhythm asked 	suspiciously. She was increasingly like a regular mother when with 	her daughter.

	"Of 	course I don't know," the girl said. "And of course Aunt 	Melody and Aunt Harmony haven't told me anything. I'm sure panties 	have nothing to do with it."

	Cyrus 	had to bite his tongue. The girl was learning early what secrets to 	keep.

	The 	pastel line led them to a campsite they hadn't known about before. 	It wasn't on the enchanted path network, which meant there could be 	danger, but Rhythm was sure she could handle it.

	"There's 	even a nice bed," Kadence remarked. "Can I have it?"

	Rhythm 	hesitated. "Let me borrow Cousin Eve's talent to check it. She 	can tell anything about anything that isn't alive, just by touching 	it." She poked a finger at the bed. And froze.

	"Rhythm!" 	Cyrus exclaimed, alarmed.

	"Mother!" 	Kadence said, also alarmed.

	Rhythm 	just stood there, her finger touching the bed. She did not seem to 	be breathing.

	Cyrus 	threw his arms about her and lifted her away from the bed. Then she 	came back to life. "Dear. I haven't changed yet," she 	murmured in his ear. then kissed it.

	She 	meant her age. She thought he was embracing her. "You were 	stuck there frozen," he said, setting her down. "We feared 	for you.'"

	"Now 	I remember. I touched that bed, and it was as if I died. I couldn't 	even breathe."

	She 	faced the bed, "Now I know its nature: it's a Death Bed. Anyone 	who lies on it, dies."

	"I 	was going to lie on it!" Kadence said, horrified.

	"Don't 	touch it," Cyrus said, also horrified.

	"Maybe 	this isn't the best place to camp." Kadence said, shuddering.

	"I'll 	destroy it," Rhythm said, her drum and drumsticks appearing.

	"Wait," 	Cyrus said. "This is not necessarily a bad thing. Maybe people 	who are tired of life come here. It would be an easy way to end it. 	All we have to do is leave it alone."

	"You're 	so practical," Rhythm said, turning an adoring gaze on him.

	"I 	wish you wouldn't do that when you're—twelve," he said 	uncomfortably.

	"I 	got my crush on you at this age," she said. "That's what 	got us into this mess. But I don't want to waste any part of my 	adult hour on incidentals like talk or food."

	She 	had a point. "Still, when Kadence is present—"

	"As 	if I didn't know you love each other," Kadence said.

	"Still, 	it's an awkward situation."

	That 	sobered Kadence. "Are they going to abolish me?" she asked 	plaintively.

	Rhythm 	hugged her, "Over my dead body."

	"Don't 	lie on the Death Bed!" Kadence cried, half laughing.

	That 	gave Cyrus an awful thought. "That Death Bed—could it be 	along this route not by accident?"

	Rhythm 	met his gaze, appalled, "The storks—they wouldn't do 	that, would they?"

	"Of 	course not," Cyrus said. But he was in doubt. The elimination 	of Kadence might be the first step in dealing with his Violation of 	the Adult Conspiracy.

	"I'm 	going to tell my sisters," Rhythm said grimly. "They'll 	look out for us."

	"Is 	that wise? They might do something rash."

	She 	nodded. "They might indeed. All right, I'll leave them out of 	it, for now."

	"Maybe 	that's best," Cyrus agreed. This was anything but an innocent 	trip.

	There 	was a patch of pretty flowers shaped like mugs, each filled with 	nectar. Rhythm touched one cautiously with her little finger, "It's 	ale!" she said. "Fem ale."

	"It's 	for you," Kadence said. "Female."

	"No," 	Cyrus said firmly. "Ale—any ale—is an adult drink. 	You two stick to boot rear or tsoda pop."

	"Awww," 	Rhythm and Kadence said together, smiling.

	"I 	will stick with innocent drinks too," he said,

	'That's 	nice of you," Rhythm said. But there was a mischievous twinge 	he didn't quite trust. She was too prone to naughtiness. He loved 	and feared that,

	Cyrus 	remembered something, "I'd better check on Don."

	"Your 	robot donkey?" Kadence asked, "He's nice. I wish he had 	come along."

	"I 	asked him to stay, to keep an eye on the troupe. He is made with a 	robot radio that I can tune in on with the robot part of my brain." 	He closed his eyes, mentally dialed the number, and tuned in. "How 	are things, Don?"

	"Routine," 	the donkey said, looking around to show nothing happening. "Dull,"

	'That's 	good." He tuned out.

	'That's 	weird," Kadence said approvingly.

	"Well, 	I am half robot."

	"And 	half human," Rhythm said, "As I am about to prove again."

	"Rhythm!" 	But he couldn't help liking the way she proved it.

	They 	had pies and boot rear, then settled for the night away from the 	Bed. Rhythm did put a sleep spell on her daughter, then invoked the 	Decade spell she had not used before and embraced Cyrus.

	'Technically 	Rhythm is of age now," Melete said, watching from the tree 	branch where he had set her "If necessary, she can demonstrate 	that spell to the storks. The storks should realize that there is no 	Violation. Technically."

	Cyrus 	hoped that was the case. But if the storks went by her regular age, 	he would be in severe trouble. Just how seriously were they taking 	his matter? That bed ...

	"Now 	I can have that ale," Rhythm said. She went to pick up the Fern 	ale mug, and he couldn't stop her So he took a mug also. His turned 	out to be Reg ale, which seemed fit for a feast.

	She 	tried a sip. "This is good," she remarked, and took a 	bigger sip. "I always suspected that Adults were hiding secret 	pleasures from children." She took a gulp,

	"You 	should go easy on that stuff." he said.

	"Really?" 	She swallowed more. "I'm feeling great."

	"That's 	its effect. But too much can make you sick.' '

	"I 	don't believe it." She drained the mug. She became visibly more 	voluptuously female.

	Cyrus 	was nervous about this. She was adult, for the hour, but lacked much 	adult experience. He was feeling his own drink, and feared she was 	too. "I hope I'm not contributing to your delinquency."

	"I'm 	not going to let them banish you, Cyrus—or Kadence,'' Rhythm 	said, her hair turning wild. "I am 	a Sorceress, and with my sisters' help 	I mean to set this whole thing straight." She got up to go for 	another drink.

	He 	had to distract her before she got drunk. "Oh, I love you, I 	love you!" he said, kissing her. "Especially when you 	start being barbaric."

	"Even 	though I used a love spring on you'?" she asked teasingly.

	"I 	told you: you won me with your first grown kiss. That love spring 	didn't make any more difference to me than it did to you."

	"I 	know."

	"You 	do? How?"

	"Because 	it wasn't really a love spring. I just told you that so you wouldn't 	resist."

	"You 	vixen! If I had known that—"

	"You 	would have resisted despite loving me," she said. "Instead 	of abandoning yourself to the passion of it."

	He 	nodded. "I would have tried to resist. I don't think you would 	have let me succeed."

	'True. 	I would have done this." She did something naughty.

	"Rhythm!" 	He had thought he was beyond shock. At her for doing it, and at 	himself for liking it.

	"And 	this." Naughtier.

	"I 	would not have succeeded," he agreed as he reacted. He was 	beginning to feel a bit barbaric himself. What a woman she was!

	Then 	she lurched to her feet, staggered to the nearest brush, and spewed 	out the remains of her ale.

	He 	got up and held her while she heaved. "I'm sorry."

	"You 	warned me." After a messy moment she straightened up. "I'm 	okay now."

	"That's 	good.'

	"Next 	time I'll drink slower."

	"That 	will spare you the sickness."

	"That 	will spare me from telling you more than I should."

	So 	she hadn't intended to tell him about the fake love spring, "And 	doing more than you should."

	"No, 	that's all right. I love you." She kissed him avidly, Her mouth 	was rather slippery, but he didn't mind.

	"Are 	you sure you're up to—"

	She 	hauled him to the ground with her. She was intoxicatingly female 	despite losing much of the drink. "Quite sure."

	In 	due course their hour ended, Rhythm reverted, and they sank 	blissfully into normal sleep, side by side. If Melete found that 	improper, she didn't say. Maybe she had been freaked out by their 	naughtiness. Or just maybe she had enjoyed the show.

	In 	the morning they organized and made ready to resume following the 	pastel trail. Cyrus assumed it would get them there on time. He 	checked on the troupe via Don, and was pleased that things there 	remained completely dull.

	There 	was a swirl of smoke. "What is happening sound?"

	Cyrus 	and Kadence stared. "Did that smoke talk?" Kadence asked.

	"I 	think it did," Cyrus said,

	"Metria, 	go away," Rhythm snapped.

	"Happening 	how?" Cyrus asked, perplexed.

	"Don't 	say that!" Rhythm said, "It will only get her started."

	"Approved, 	solid, boom, bell, echo, noise, listen—"

	"Hear?" 	he asked.

	"Whatever," 	the smoke agreed, irritated,

	"Here!" 	Kadence exclaimed. "What is happening here!"

	"Exactly 	what I said," the smoke said, forming into a luscious human 	female body. "I recognize Princess Rhythm, but who the bleep 	are you?"

	"Maybe 	next time."

	"Grumble."

	"Hee 	haw," Cyrus laughed.

	They 	found Kadence. "Come with us," Rhythm said. "It's 	important."

	The 	child didn't argue. She respected her mother, more than ever since 	discovering the powers of Sorcery.

	Soon 	they were following the pastel line out of the camp, Cyrus had some 	trouble seeing it at first, so Rhythm enhanced it with a spell so 	that both he and Kadence could see it clearly. That way there would 	never be any doubt about their route.

	"But 	you know, Kadence," Rhythm said as they walked. "When we 	camp tonight—"

	"Oh, 	I know. You can put a sleep spell on me so you can do naughty things 	with Father,"

	"Are 	you sure you have no idea what they are?" Rhythm asked 	suspiciously. She was increasingly like a regular mother when with 	her daughter.

	"Of 	course I don't know," the girl said. "And of course Aunt 	Melody and Aunt Harmony haven't told me anything. I'm sure panties 	have nothing to do with it."

	Cyrus 	had to bite his tongue. The girl was learning early what secrets to 	keep.

	The 	pastel line led them to a campsite they hadn't known about before. 	It wasn't on the enchanted path network, which meant there could be 	danger, but Rhythm was sure she could handle it.

	"There's 	even a nice bed," Kadence remarked. "Can I have it?"

	Rhythm 	hesitated. "Let me borrow Cousin Eve's talent to check it. She 	can tell anything about anything that isn't alive, just by touching 	it." She poked a finger at the bed. And froze.

	"Rhythm!" 	Cyrus exclaimed, alarmed.

	"Mother!" 	Kadence said, also alarmed.

	Rhythm 	just stood there, her finger touching the bed. She did not seem to 	be breathing.

	Cyrus 	threw his arms about her and lifted her away from the bed. Then she 	came back to life. "Dear. I haven't changed yet," she 	murmured in his ear. then kissed it.

	She 	meant her age. She thought he was embracing her. "You were 	stuck there frozen," he said, setting her down. "We feared 	for you."

	"Now 	I remember. I touched that bed, and it was as if I died. I couldn't 	even breathe."

	She 	faced the bed. "Now I know its nature: it's a Death Bed. Anyone 	who lies on it, dies."

	"I 	was going to lie on it!" Kadence said, horrified.

	"Don't 	touch it," Cyrus said, also horrified.

	"Maybe 	this isn't the best place to camp." Kadence said, shuddering.

	"I'll 	destroy it," Rhythm said, her drum and drumsticks appearing.

	"Wait," 	Cyrus said. "This is not necessarily a bad thing. Maybe people 	who are tired of life come here. It would be an easy way to end it. 	All we have to do is leave it alone."

	"You're 	so practical," Rhythm said, turning an adoring gaze on him.

	"I 	wish you wouldn't do that when you're—twelve," he said 	uncomfortably.

	"I 	got my crush on you at this age," she said. "That's what 	got us into this mess. But I don't want to waste any part of my 	adult hour on incidentals like talk or food."

	She 	had a point. "Still, when Kadence is present—"

	"As 	if I didn't know you love each other," Kadence said.

	"Still, 	it's an awkward situation."

	That 	sobered Kadence. "Are they going to abolish me?" she asked 	plaintively.

	Rhythm 	hugged her, "Over my dead body."

	"Don't 	lie on the Death Bed!" Kadence cried, half laughing.

	That 	gave Cyrus an awful thought. "That Death Bed—could it be 	along this route not by accident?"

	Rhythm 	met his gaze, appalled, "The storks—they wouldn't do 	that, would they?"

	"Of 	course not," Cyrus said. But he was in doubt. The elimination 	of Kadence might be the first step in dealing with his Violation of 	the Adult Conspiracy.

	"I'm 	going to tell my sisters," Rhythm said grimly. "They'll 	look out for us."

	"Is 	that wise? They might do something rash."

	She 	nodded. "They might indeed. All right, I'll leave them out of 	it, for now."

	"Maybe 	that's best," Cyrus agreed. This was anything but an innocent 	trip.

	There 	was a patch of pretty flowers shaped like mugs, each filled with 	nectar. Rhythm touched one cautiously with her little finger, "It's 	ale!" she said. "Fem ale."

	"It's 	for you," Kadence said. "Female."

	"No," 	Cyrus said firmly. "Ale—any ale—is an adult drink. 	You two stick to boot rear or tsoda pop."

	"Awww," 	Rhythm and Kadence said together, smiling.

	"I 	will stick with innocent drinks too," he said.

	'That's 	nice of you," Rhythm said. But there was a mischievous twinge 	he didn't quite trust. She was too prone to naughtiness. He loved 	and feared that,

	Cyrus 	remembered something, "I'd better check on Don."

	"Your 	robot donkey?" Kadence asked, "He's nice. I wish he had 	come along."

	"I 	asked him to stay, to keep an eye on the troupe. He is made with a 	robot radio that I can tune in on with the robot part of my brain." 	He closed his eyes, mentally dialed the number, and tuned in. "How 	are things, Don?"

	"Routine," 	the donkey said, looking around to show nothing happening. "Dull,"

	'That's 	good." He tuned out.

	'That's 	weird," Kadence said approvingly.

	"Well, 	I am half robot."

	"And 	half human," Rhythm said, "As I am about to prove again."

	"Rhythm!" 	But he couldn't help liking the way she proved it.

	They 	had pies and boot rear, then settled for the night away from the 	Bed. Rhythm did put a sleep spell on her daughter, then invoked the 	Decade spell she had not used before and embraced Cyrus.

	'Technically 	Rhythm is of age now," Melete said, watching from the tree 	branch where he had set her "If necessary, she can demonstrate 	that spell to the storks. The storks should realize that there is no 	Violation. Technically."

	Cyrus 	hoped that was the case. But if the storks went by her regular age, 	he would be in severe trouble. Just how seriously were they taking 	his matter? That bed ...

	"Now 	I can have that ale," Rhythm said. She went to pick up the Fern 	ale mug, and he couldn't stop her. So he took a mug also. His turned 	out to be Reg ale, which seemed fit for a feast.

	She 	tried a sip. "This is good," she remarked, and took a 	bigger sip. "I always suspected that Adults were hiding secret 	pleasures from children." She took a gulp,

	"You 	should go easy on that stuff." he said.

	"Really?" 	She swallowed more. "I'm feeling great."

	"That's 	its effect. But too much can make you sick.' '

	"I 	don't believe it." She drained the mug. She became visibly more 	voluptuously female.

	Cyrus 	was nervous about this. She was adult, for the hour, but lacked much 	adult experience. He was feeling his own drink, and feared she was 	too. "I hope I'm not contributing to your delinquency."

	"I'm 	not going to let them banish you, Cyrus—or Kadence,'' Rhythm 	said, her hair turning wild. "I am 	a Sorceress, and with my sisters' help 	I mean to set this whole thing straight." She got up to go for 	another drink.

	He 	had to distract her before she got drunk. "Oh, I love you, I 	love you!" he said, kissing her. "Especially when you 	start being barbaric."

	"Even 	though I used a love spring on you'?" she asked teasingly.

	"I 	told you: you won me with your first grown kiss. That love spring 	didn't make any more difference to me than it did to you."

	"I 	know."

	"You 	do'.' How?"

	"Because 	it wasn't really a love spring. I just told you that so you wouldn't 	resist."

	"You 	vixen! If I had known that—"

	"You 	would have resisted despite loving me," she said. "Instead 	of abandoning yourself to the passion of it."

	He 	nodded. "I would have tried to resist. I don't think you would 	have let me succeed."

	'True. 	I would have done this." She did something naughty.

	"Rhythm!" 	He had thought he was beyond shock. At her for doing it, and at 	himself for liking it.

	"And 	this." Naughtier.

	"I 	would not have succeeded," he agreed as he reacted. He was 	beginning to feel a bit barbaric himself. What a woman she was!

	Then 	she lurched to her feet, staggered to the nearest brush, and spewed 	out the remains of her ale.

	He 	got up and held her while she heaved. "I'm sorry."

	"You 	warned me." After a messy moment she straightened up. "I'm 	okay now."

	"That's 	good.'

	"Next 	time I'll drink slower."

	"That 	will spare you the sickness."

	"That 	will spare me from telling you more than I should."

	So 	she hadn't intended to tell him about the fake love spring, "And 	doing more than you should."

	"No, 	that's all right. I love you." She kissed him avidly, Her mouth 	was rather slippery, but he didn't mind.

	"Are 	you sure you're up to—"

	She 	hauled him to the ground with her. She was intoxicatingly female 	despite losing much of the drink. "Quite sure."

	In 	due course their hour ended, Rhythm reverted, and they sank 	blissfully into normal sleep, side by side. If Melete found that 	improper, she didn't say. Maybe she had been freaked out by their 	naughtiness. Or just maybe she had enjoyed the show.

	In 	the morning they organized and made ready to resume following the 	pastel trail. Cyrus assumed it would get them there on time. He 	checked on the troupe via Don, and was pleased that things there 	remained completely dull.

	There 	was a swirl of smoke. "What is happening sound?"

	Cyrus 	and Kadence stared. "Did that smoke talk?" Kadence asked.

	"I 	think it did," Cyrus said,

	"Metria, 	go away," Rhythm snapped.

	"Happening 	how?" Cyrus asked, perplexed.

	"Don't 	say that!" Rhythm said, "It will only get her started."

	"Approved, 	solid, boom, bell, echo, noise, listen—"

	"Hear?" 	he asked.

	"Whatever," 	the smoke agreed, irritated,

	"Here!" 	Kadence exclaimed. "What is happening here!"

	"Exactly 	what I said," the smoke said, forming into a luscious human 	female body. "I recognize Princess Rhythm, but who the bleep 	are you?"





	*** 	missing page ***

	 	asked.

	Cyrus 	felt his pocket. It was empty. "Oh, no—I forgot to pick 	her up from the tree branch this morning!"

	"That 	bleeping demoness distracted us," Rhythm said. She evidently 	did not have the same trouble with swearing that her daughter did.

	"I 	must go back for her,"

	"We 	don't have time to do it without being observed. We're already 	running late."

	She 	was right. "I'll just have to pick her up when we return," 	he decided. He wasn't comfortable about it, though. If he lost the 	Muse, how could he ever write his next play?

	They 	followed the pastel line, which meandered so that soon Cyrus had no 	idea where they were going. It did lead them past enough pie trees 	to keep them fed. and to another campsite as evening approached. 	This one was by a nice-looking lake.

	Cyrus 	did not quite trust this. "Anything could be in there," he 	said.

	Indeed, 	shapes were appearing. One was bare breasted. "A mermaid!" 	Kadence exclaimed.

	"Hello," 	the figure said. "I am Carla, your mermaid." Her tail 	formed into legs, and she strode from the water. She was no longer 	bare, but formally clothed. That was just as well, because the 	maid's bare body in the water had tried to compel his gaze, and he 	had felt Rhythm's annoyance. She didn't like him staring at other 	women's bodies, for some reason.

	A 	merman followed, similarly adjusting. "I am Carlos, your 	merbutler."

	"But 	we don't need—" Cyrus said.

	Rhythm 	concentrated for half a moment. "They mean no haiTn," she 	said, evidently having invoked more magic.

	"Of 	course we don't," Carla said. "We are here to make you 	comfortable during your stay by our lake."

	Cyrus 	did what he should have thought to do before, and riffled through 	his memory bank, "You have an estate under water," he 	said. "Where guests can breathe."

	"Indeed 	we do," Carlos agreed. "This way, please." He walked 	back into the lake.

	Cyrus 	exchanged a look with Rhythm. This might be worthwhile, but he 	didn't fully trust it, because the pastel line had been leading them 	past seemingly coincidental dangers.

	Rhythm 	nodded. She would be alert. She took his hand, and Kadence's hand.

	"You're 	beautiful, when you try, Mother," Kadence remarked.

	Now 	Cyrus realized what he hadn't noticed in his distraction: Rhythm had 	assumed her adult form. She must have invoked the Decade spell when 	the merfolk appeared. Why?

	"So 	they won't separate us, dear," Rhythm replied to his thought, 	squeezing his hand suggestively.

	Oh. 	How had he won the love of 	such a passionate princess? He surely did 	not deserve it.

	"You 	didn't win it," she said. "It was given to you, and 	you spumed it."

	He 	had been trying to honor the Adult Conspiracy, He should have known 	he never had a chance when a jealous 	Sorceress fixed her eye on him.

	"Right 	on," she agreed.

	They 	were now below the 	surface of the lake, breathing naturally. The distraction of Rhythm 	had made him miss 	the actual 	immersion.

	"I'm 	a wild one," she agreed, "I'm barbaric." She 	loved teasing him about his quest for a 	barbarian wench.

	"Mother, 	I wish you would stop answering his thoughts," Kadence said, 	"It drives me crazy wondering what horrible Conspiracy things 	he's thinking at you."

	"That's 	the beauty of the Conspiracy," Rhythm 	agreed. "It tortures children every 	which way."

	"I 	 was just basking in the love of your 	mother," Cyrus said to Kadence.

	The 	merbutler led them to a fine house, "Carla 	will make your bed while I serve your dinner," Carlos said.

	"What 	about me?" Kadence asked.

	A 	third mer person appeared, "I am your memanny," she said. 	"I will see to your needs this night."

	Kadence 	was surprised. "What needs?"

	"For 	relaxation and entertainment. Do you like I-scream? Cookies? Tsoda 	pop? Pewter games?"

	Kadence 	smiled. "Those arc my needs," 	she agreed.

	The 	butler was as good as his word. He served 	a sumptuous dinner with ent wine at the start and intert wine at the 	end. The first twisted Cyrus's mind pleasantly, and the second made 	the two of them socialize closely. He could hardly wait to be alone 	with Rhythm in the bedroom.

	Now 	Cyrus realized what he hadn't noticed in his distraction: Rhythm had 	assumed her adult form. She must have invoked the Decade spell when 	the merfolk appeared. Why?

	"So 	they won't separate us, dear," Rhythm replied to his thought, 	squeezing his hand suggestively.

	Oh. 	How had he won the love of 	such a passionate princess? He surely did 	not deserve it.

	"You 	didn't win it," she said. "It was given to you, and 	you spumed it."

	He 	had been trying to honor the Adult Conspiracy, He should have known 	he never had a chance when a jealous 	Sorceress fixed her eye on him.

	"Right 	on," she agreed.

	They 	were now below the 	surface of the lake, breathing naturally. The distraction of Rhythm 	had made him miss 	the actual 	immersion.

	"I'm 	a wild one," she agreed, "I'm barbaric." She 	loved teasing him about his quest for a 	barbarian wench.

	"Mother, 	I wish you would stop answering his thoughts," Kadence said, 	"It drives me crazy wondering what horrible Conspiracy things 	he's thinking at you."

	"That's 	the beauty of the Conspiracy," Rhythm 	agreed. "It tortures children every 	which way."

	"I 	 was just basking in the love of your 	mother," Cyrus said to Kadence.

	The 	merbutler led them to a fine house, "Carla 	will make your bed while I serve your dinner," Carlos said.

	"What 	about me?" Kadence asked.

	A 	third mer person appeared, "I am your memanny," she said. 	"I will see to your needs this night."

	Kadence 	was surprised. "What needs?"

	"For 	relaxation and entertainment. Do you like I-scream? Cookies? Tsoda 	pop? Pewter games?"

	Kadence 	smiled. "Those arc my needs," 	she agreed.

	The 	butler was as good as his word. He served 	a sumptuous dinner with ent wine at the start and intert wine at the 	end. The first twisted Cyrus's mind pleasantly, and the second made 	the two of them socialize closely. He could hardly wait to be alone 	with Rhythm in the bedroom.

	Then 	he had a horrible thought. "The hour has passed!"

	"No 	it hasn't, dean I'm using illusion to emulate my adult self. I'll 	invoke the spell when we're alone."

	He 	stared at her "But my thoughts—I didn't limit them. There 	may have been all manner of forbidden things. Especially after the 	second drink."

	"There 	were," she said smugly.

	"And 	your appearance, that dress—you're showing the upper surfaces 	of full breasts."

	"It's 	nice to have my effort of illusion appreciated."

	"Do 	you realize you're getting me deeper and deeper into Violation?"

	"Deeper 	and deeper," she agreed dreamily. "I've got rhythm, of 	course."

	He 	blushed, "I didn't mean it that way!"

	"I 	did."

	"You 	minx! You should be ashamed."

	"Yes. 	Awfully. You should spank me." She sent a mental image of a 	bare bottom.

	He 	was appalled. That was no child's bottom. "Rhythm—"

	"Let's 	skip dessert." she said, producing the Decade sphere, "This 	will do instead."

	He 	could not argue. He had been hopelessly compromised, and was even 	more hopelessly in love.

	They 	adjourned to the bedroom, which the mermaid had prepared 	very nicely. They kissed and fell together on the bed and 	generated the most intense ellipsis yet.

	Then, 	as they lay panting after the effort. Rhythm paused sharply.

	"What?" 	he asked, bemused that she could do that. Other people's pauses were 	usually dull, not sharp.

	"Kadence. 	She's in danger." She scrambled off the bed, grabbing for her 	clothing, which resembled her illusion dress exactly.

	"We 	shouldn't have trusted her away from us," Cyrus said, diving 	into his own clothing, which he had somehow managed to shed beside 	the bed. "That nanny—"

	"Not 	her fault," Rhythm said. "This is something else,"

	They 	hurried out of the room and went to Kadence's room. TTiey charged 	inside without knocking.

	The 	child was reaching for an object. It looked like a small statue of a 	mermaid, with beautifully flowing hair, a full bare bosom, and a 	splendid tail. The nanny was watching, unconcerned.

	Both 	paused as the two burst in.

	"Don't 	touch it!" Rhythm cried,

	"It's 	harmless," the nanny protested. "It's just a statue of my 	grandmother in her prime. She was a supreme object of desire."

	"I'll 	touch it," Rhythm said grimly. 	She went up and poked one finger at the statue.

	The 	statue exploded into vapor. A noxious cloud formed, then shaped into 	a horrendous demon. "I am the object of D's ire," he 	proclaimed, "Anyone who touches me suffers my ire. Woe to you, 	you nasty brat." His huge hands moved forward as if to catch 	and squeeze someone's puny neck.

	Only 	it was Rhythm's neck they closed on, not the child's. "Woe to 	who?" she asked evenly as electricity played about the contact,

	"What 	the bleep are you?" the demon demanded, surprised.

	"I 	am the Sorceress Rhythm, And you are about to be one hurting demon. 	Did you think you could attack my daughter and not answer to me?" 	The electricity intensified.

	The 	demon tried to let go. but the current held his hands locked in 	place. "Ooooww!" he howled in pain.

	"Exactly." 	The current intensified further. Smoke began to rise from his 	burning hands.

	"I 	didn't knooow!" he protested. "I was just following 	orders. Oooo, that smarts!"

	"What 	orders?" Cyrus demanded.

	"To 	eliminate the child."

	So 	there was a 	plot! "Who gave them?"

	"It 	was—was—" But then the demon exploded into awful 	nothingness,

	"Bleep," 	Rhythm swore, "I overdid it."

	The 	nanny was staring at them, horrified. "I had no idea!" she 	said, 'The nasty demon must have taken the place of my statue. I'm 	so sorry. I never would have led any child into danger."

	Rhythm 	glanced at her. and nodded, verifying that she was telling the 	truth. "You had no way of knowing. But I think I had better 	keep my daughter with me now, just in case."

	"Yes, 	by all means," the nanny agreed, shaken.

	"Can 	she come too?" Kadence asked plaintively. "She's nice."

	Rhythm 	laughed. "Very well, but she must agree not to tell what she 	sees of our private lives."

	"Oh, 	of course," the nanny agreed. "Nannies see everything, and 	tell nothing."

	It 	was surely true. So they retired to their own room, bringing Kadence 	and the memanny along. As it turned out. the nanny continued to keep 	the child entertained, so that Cyrus and Rhythm could get some rest 	and sleep. Rhythm reverted to girlform, lying beside him, and the 	nanny pretended not to notice.

	But 	Cyrus lay for some time awake. They had confirmed that someone or 	something was out to get Kadence, so the other dangers were not 	coincidental. Kadence had almost lain down on the death bed, and 	there were also the plants growing ales. But who could it be, and 	why?

	The 	question suggested an answer Ragna Roc. Cyrus was supposed to use 	his troupe to get Rhythm close to the nasty bird, so she could 	nullify him. If anything happened to her or her daughter, she would 	be unable to complete her mission. She might be only twelve, but she 	loved Kadence, as he did, and would be devastated. Rhythm could take 	care of herself, as the scene with the demon had just made 	uncomfortably clear, but though Kadence was a Sorceress in her own 	right, she lacked the experience to defend herself against anything 	as malign as a demon.

	But 	if Ragna Roc knew about them, how could they ever get into his 	presence to nullify him? And why were the threats so devious? Why 	didn't he just send a warrior to take them all out? The bird lacked 	any inhibitions about foul play, and would happily destroy them. So 	that must mean the big bird didn't know about them.

	Then 	how to explain the threats?

	"Dear," 	Rhythm murmured sleepily, "your thoughts are disturbing me. If 	you don't stop, I'll distract you from them."

	He 	knew exactly how she would do that, even if it freaked out Kadence 	and the nanny. He had to stop worrying.

	She 	took his hand, "That's better."

	Holding 	hands wasn't really a Violation, he told himself. Adults held the 	hands of children all the time. Still, he felt guilty.

	"That, 	too." she said. "Go to sleep." And she backed it up 	with a spot sleep spell. He was unconscious until morning.

	The 	merbutler and mermaid were jointly appalled when they learned of the 	incident with the demon. It seemed that, true to her word, the nanny 	had not told them. "We never!" the butler said.

	"Never!" 	the maid agreed.

	"We 	know," Cyrus said. "Your hospitality has been impeccable. 	We have been beset by similar problems throughout our journey. We 	thank you for an otherwise excellent night."

	Rhythm 	added her endorsement, and when they still fretted, added an 	acceptance spell. Then they walked up out of the lake and resumed 	their journey.

	"I 	dislike showing magic." Rhythm said, "but I think we had 	better hurry before something else happens. We're behind schedule 	anyway."

	"Hurry?"

	"Take 	my hand." She caught his hand and Kadence's.

	The 	scenery around them changed. They were now standing at the entrance 	to the Stork Works.

	Oh. 	Cyrus nerved himself for the challenge to come.





	Chapter 10: Dream


	Stymy 	Stork was courteous but regretful as the three of them sat in his 	office. "I am sorry to have to bring up such a matter, 	realizing that the two of you were swept away by circumstance. But 	whatever the circumstance. Violation of the Adult Conspiracy is a 	most serious matter. As Head Stork, and deliverer of the bundle, I 	share some blame; this should never have been allowed to happen."

	"I 	know it," Cyrus said. "And I am 	mortified to have done it, I am ready to accept whatever penalty is 	required, except—"

	"This 	is irrelevant," Stymy said,

	"Except 	I want no harm to come to Princess Rhythm or Kadence, who deserve no 	rebuke."

	'There 	seems to be a misapprehension," the stork said, "You are 	not being charged."

	"Not—what?"

	"You 	are the Victim, 	not the Perpetrator,"

	Cyrus 	stared at him blankly. "Victim?"

	"According 	to our records. Princess Rhythm was age twenty-two when the 	Violation occurred. You were two. She is guilty of Child 	Molestation,"

	Now 	Rhythm and Kadence stared at him, open mouthed, "Two?" 	Rhythm asked after a ragged two thirds of a pause.

	"I'm 	six," Kadence said, a little swirl of confusion circling her 	head.

	"I 	was assembled adult!" Cyrus protested.

	"I 	realize that," Stymy said. "But our records are somewhat 	literal minded. I remember when there was a five-year confusion that 	caused me to decline to make a delivery, leading to serious 	complications. I don't want to make any such mistake again. That's 	why I elected to handle this matter 	personally,"

	Cyrus 	had the ugly impression that no matter how apologetic this talking 	stork was, he would do what he felt was proper. That could be deadly 	to Kadence. Meanwhile Rhythm's silence was ominous; if there did 	turn out to be any threat to her daughter's existence, there would 	be serious mischief. So he had to ease the crisis however he could.

	"What 	is required to straighten this out?" Cyrus asked.

	"Three 	things. First we must establish that you are adult, so that no abuse 	occurred. Second, we must establish the current age for Kadence, so 	that she herself does not later suffer the same complication that 	Surprise Golem did." Stymy covered his beak with a wing, "Oops! 	I should not have mentioned her name. That record is supposed to be 	sealed. Please forget it."

	"Forgotten," 	Cyrus said immediately.

	"Third, 	Rhythm must be lectured on acting in a manner becoming to her age, 	and she must promise to reform."

	"The 	bleep I will!" Rhythm snapped. "I love him." Kadence 	giggled.

	Cyrus 	hastily interceded, "She means she will be glad to cooperate in 	any way feasible." He moved on quickly, before Rhythm could 	object. "How do I establish my adult status?"

	"Merely 	sign a statement to the effect that you were created adult by 	definition, in the manner of a robot, as your father was." A 	paper appeared on the desk.

	Cyrus 	signed it, "Done. Now Rhythm is not guilty of any infraction,"

	"Technically." 	Stymy agreed with a wry curve of his beak. He turned to Kadence. 	"How did you become age six in only a month?"

	"Mother 	garbled a spell, and time accelerated," Kadence said 	immediately. "That's how the first nine months passed so 	quickly, and the following six years, before she could turn it off."

	Stymy 	nodded, "That explains how it was that we received what seemed 	like a backdated signal. I assumed it was a clerical error. 	Evidently it wasn't."

	"It 	was a local time warp," Cyrus said. "It seemed like only 	an hour or two to us, but we all aged six years. Then when Rhythm 	nullified the spell, she and I reverted to our natural ages, but 	Kadence didn't."

	"We 	had better enter her as delivered at age six." Stymy said. 	"These things happen."

	"They 	do," Cyrus agreed, relieved.

	The 	stork turned to Rhythm. He had seemed like a rather benign bird, 	anxious to get the paperwork straight. Now he seemed uncomfortably 	serious. Cyrus remembered that he was the head of the Stork Works, 	and had considerable power, especially over the composition of 	families.

	Rhythm 	evidently realized it too. She was a Princess and a Sorceress, but 	she quailed visibly. She knew she was in serious trouble,

	"The 	royal children have been getting increasingly naughty," Stymy 	said. "Your cousin Princess Eve—well, never mind. All of 	you have put a serious strain on the Adult Conspiracy. But you 	personally have achieved new levels of naughtiness. In fact, you are 	giving naughtiness a bad name."

	There 	was a pause, "Rhythm," Cyrus murmured.

	She 	turned to him with an expression of fixed innocence, "What?"

	"Mother, 	say you're sorry," Kadence whispered.

	"Oh." 	Rhythm turned to the stork. "I'm sorry." But she did not 	sound completely sincere.

	"Your 	clothing is too tight," the stork continued severely. "So 	that you attract the male eye—and you're only twelve years 	old."

	"I'm 	pushing thirteen," Rhythm snapped before Cyrus could shush her. 	"I've got flesh. I'm a nascent woman."

	"You're 	a child," Stymy said firmly.

	"I 	wear a bra and panties. See?" She pulled down on the top part 	of her dress and up on the skirt, exposing critical fringes.

	Both 	Cyrus and Kadence freaked out, for different reasons. But the stork 	took it in stride. "And you have an attitude problem as big as 	Castle Roogna," he said, "Do you want me to inform your 	mother?"

	Rhythm 	collapsed, "Please, no!"

	"Then 	you will henceforth wear clothing appropriate to your status. No 	tight binding around chest or butt."

	"Appropriate 	clothing," she agreed, defeated. Her dress became two sizes 	larger, so that it was no longer tight.

	"You 	flirted shamelessly with Cyrus, who was trying to be true to the 	code," Stymy continued inexorably. "When that didn't work, 	you took naughtiness to a new level. No one has done that before. 	You should be excruciatingly ashamed."

	"Well, 	he called me a child!" she retorted.

	"Not 	any more," Cyrus said, hoping to pacify her before she damaged 	her case. At least she hadn't mentioned spanking.

	"You 	used magic to invoke a technicality of age. and shamelessly seduced 	him," Stymy said. "Thus signaling us to deliver your 	baby."

	"Yes," 	she agreed smugly. "They're both wonderful."

	"You 	must now renounce them both, and promise never to do it again. Not 	until you have aged naturally to maturity in six years."

	She 	exploded, outraged. "The bleep I will! I love him! And my 	daughter too! I won't renounce anything! I'm glad I did it!"

	Cyrus 	exchanged a horrified glance with Kadence, seeing the case abruptly 	lost.

	But 	the stork wasn't fazed. "Do you not realize that you have 	brought a child into this realm who can not share a normal family 	life with you or her father? This is bad for her upbringing and 	social adjustment. You have made a man love you who can not marry 	you. This is bad for his sanity."

	Rhythm 	froze. "Oh, I'm sorry! I didn't think of that."

	"A 	child wouldn't. That's why cautionary rules exist."

	"I 	can get along," Kadence said bravely.

	"So 	can I." Cyrus said, though it really bothered him.

	"Neither 	of you should be required to sacrifice in this manner," Stymy 	said, "You need to have a normal family life. Her action caused 	you to forfeit it."

	Rhythm 	burst into tears. "I never meant to do that! If I have to, to 	make it right, I'll give you up. Maybe you can marry someone else, 	Cyrus, and adopt Kadence. Then you'll have a family."

	"No!" 	Cyrus and Kadence said together.

	"But 	it's not right to make you suffer, I alone should suffer for my 	naughtiness."

	Cyrus 	hugged her from one side, and Kadence from the other. "We'd 	rather suffer with you, than without you," Cyrus said.

	Rhythm 	tried to speak again, but was choked off by tears.

	"Fortunately 	you have one significant thing in your favor. Princess," the 	stork said, as they sat sharing their misery.

	"I 	do?" Rhythm asked, soggily surprised.

	"Love, 	as you said. It conquers all. Even on occasion the Adult Conspiracy. 	We are required to compromise."

	"You 	are?" Cyrus asked, hardly daring to believe it.

	"It 	was in the nature of a test question. True love brooks no 	opposition. Therefore we will accept the status quo, except that we 	will ignore any signals we may receive from Princess Rhythm, 	regardless of her temporary age, until she comes of age naturally."

	"But 	what about the family?" Kadence asked.

	"This 	is unfortunate," Stymy said. "We hope that the troupe 	represents a feasible substitute. It allows you to interact 	frequently, and the members are supportive of each other. The three 	of you know your relationship, so you can act as a family when alone 	together. As I said, it is a compromise."

	But 	now Cyrus was suspicious. "Why should you compromise? It can't 	be just that there is love."

	"There 	are two other factors," Stymy agreed. "All of you are 	needed for the completion of your private mission."

	"You 	know about that?" Cyrus asked sharply.

	"Only 	that it is of vital importance to the larger welfare of Xanth, so we 	must not interfere. The Good Magician put out the word."

	Now 	Rhythm spoke. "What's the other thing?"

	"It 	is somewhat personal," the stork agreed reluctantly. "Punishing 	you would also compromise me, for making the delivery. I should have 	checked the situation more carefully. I much prefer that no issue be 	made. It could cost me my position."

	Oho! 	Cyrus had to bite his tongue to keep from chortling.

	"We 	won't tell if you don't," Rhythm said, amused but serious.

	"I 	believe we have an understanding," Stymy said, his beak making 	a wry curve.

	"Silence 	all around," Cyrus said, immensely relieved.

	"Let's 	get out of here," Kadence said. "Before anyone changes 	their mind."

	"That 	does seem best," the stork agreed.

	Outside 	the Stork Works, on their way back, Rhythm thought of something 	else. "That silence includes you," she reminded Kadence. 	"In case you should accidentally see anything at night 	you shouldn't. Because we aren't going to let you be by yourself. 	Not while something is out to get you.' '

	"Aw, 	you'll both be covered by a blanket anyway," the girl said. "It 	never shows anything."

	Cyrus 	and Rhythm exchanged half a guilty look. It was definitely time to 	move on.

	"Now 	we need to retrace our route, so I can pick up Melete," Cyrus 	said.

	"Gee—can 	we visit the merfolk again?" Kadence asked brightly.

	"I 	will make a Find spell that will guide us directly to it," 	Rhythm said with half a shudder "No need to visit the merfolk."

	Cyrus 	didn't comment. They all knew that the threat to Kadence had not 	been the mers' fault, but it remained a bad memory.

	The 	Find spell showed the direction, which wasn't exactly the way they 	had come. Actually they had not passed this way at all; Rhythm had 	transported them. It also tried to lead them through the worst of 	thickets, so they couldn't go straight.

	They 	walked along any enchanted paths they found, but few folk traveled 	to and from the Stork Works by foot, and the paths did not always go 	the direction they needed. So as night approached they looked for a 	safe spot to camp.

	"We 	are close to Melete," Rhythm said. "Which is odd."

	"Odd? 	Why?"

	"Because 	we are nowhere near where we left her,"

	He 	did not like that, "Do you think this is more of the mischief 	we have been encountering?"

	"It 	may be," she said grimly,

	"But 	you can protect us. Mother," Kadence said, sounding not quite 	certain.

	"She 	can protect us," Cyrus said reassuringly.

	There 	was a peal of thunder, A thunderstorm was brewing. "Fracto has 	seen us," Rhythm said. "He's going to wet on us if he 	can."

	'There's 	a cave," Kadence said.

	"My 	Writer's Block is in there, or beyond it in that direction," 	Cyrus said, surprised.

	"I 	will check it." Rhythm went to the mouth of the cave, "Hello 	in there. Are there any monsters or dangerous creatures lurking?"

	"I 	am the only occupant," a nymphly voice replied. "I'm a 	Lady."

	"She's 	telling the truth," Rhythm said. "I don't have the energy 	to do a full check. It should be all right."

	The 	first drops of water spattered around them, encouraging their entry. 	They walked into the cave, which was of goodly diameter. They turned 	a comer, where faint light leaked around.

	And 	came up against the snout of a fire-breathing dragon. "Uh-oh." 	Rhythm murmured as her drum and drumsticks appeared.

	"Do 	not be alarmed," the Dragon Lady said. "I am not going to 	scorch you. You sounded like nice people, so I invited you in. I 	never toast a visitor."

	So 	it seemed, "I am Cyrus Cyborg, and this is Rhyme, and her 	little sister Kadence." He was not completely easy with the 	deception, but it was for a necessary cause.

	"I 	am so glad to meet you."

	"You 	talk like a nymph," Kadence said, surprised.

	The 	Lady smiled, the expression rippling from one side of her long 	toothy mouth to the other. "I had a nymph as a roommate for 	some time. She taught me how to talk human style, and I taught her 	how to chomp a fresh man. It seemed like a fair exchange. She 	finally got lonely for her own kind, leaving me lonely for company. 	But local folk don't quite trust me. for some reason."

	"She 	is telling the truth," Rhythm repeated. "We can trust her 	not to scorch or eat us ."

	"Ah, 	that's your talent," the Lady said. "To ascertain truth ."

	"Part 	of it." Rhythm agreed cautiously.

	"You 	must be hungry after traveling, I have assorted roasts, and some 	baked potatoes and bread." She looked apologetic. "Everything 	is hot; it's my nature. You will have to go outside for cool 	drinks."

	"I'll 	fetch some," Kadence said eagerly. She dashed outside the cave.

	"I 	also have warm pillows," the Lady said.

	"We'll 	make do," Cyrus said. He pondered briefly, then decided to ask. 	"We are searching for a certain wooden block, and understand it 	is in the cave. Have you seen it?"

	'This 	block?" the Lady asked, lifting it in a curl of her tail.

	"Get 	me out of this!" Melete called. "She's a nice dragon, but 	I can't help her."

	"That 	block," Cyrus agreed. "I am a playwright, and that is my 	Writer's Block. I can't write at all well without it. In fact I am 	stymied on a play now." The word reminded him of Stymy Stork. 	"May I have it back?"

	"Certainly." 	The tail swung around, delivering the Block. "I found it on the 	branch of a tree, and it intrigued me, as I recognized its nature, 	so I brought it home. But it doesn't work for me, perhaps because I 	am not a writer."

	"It 	will work only for me," Cyrus said. "Thank you for 	returning it. Is there any favor I can do you in exchange?"

	"I 	hesitate to ask. I have a dream."

	"A 	familiar dream," Melete said, "She's a young female."

	"You 	want to be an actress!" Rhythm exclaimed.

	"I 	blush to confess it. But other dragons aren't interested in that 	sort of thing, and most humans won't trust me close enough to 	ascertain my ability. I even tried to query the Curse Fiends, but 	they cursed me away,"

	It 	was an easy decision. "You returned my Block. I will write you 	into the next play,"

	"Oh, 	thank you! I am so grateful,"

	"However, 	you will have to come join my troupe," Cyrus said. "And 	not eat any of the actors."

	"Cross 	my tail and hope to fry," the Lady said in an evident oath, 	"This is so exciting."

	"I 	will get on it the moment we return safely."

	"May 	I ask a personal question? I do not wish to be offensive."

	"Ask," 	Cyrus said, suspecting what was coming,

	"The 	girl resembles you. Rhyme. You introduced her as your sister, and 	perhaps she is. But the two of you are clearly in love, yet you look 	to be only about twelve. Rhyme, This close to the Stork Works—well, 	I suspect your story is somewhat more interesting than merely being 	tourists."

	Cyrus 	saw Rhythm doing a quick mental calculation. He knew she wanted to 	invoke the Decade spell and be with him, but couldn't do that with 	an intelligent dragon watching. Unless the dragon agreed not to 	tell. "Will you keep a secret? A big one?"

	"Cross 	my tail and hope to fry myself to a cinder," the Lady agreed 	solemnly.

	"Cyrus 	and I are in love, yes. I was naughty, and we got a daughter. We had 	to explain to the storks. Now we can't 	love each other openly, but I can invoke a spell to make me older. 	Do you mind?"

	"Mind? 	I am in love with love! Especially forbidden love, I dream of 	finding it some day myself. But male dragons aren't much into 	nymph-talking females, except as a staple of their diets. Do 	anything you want; I won't tell."

	Kadence 	returned, somewhat wet, with three mugs of drinks. "These were 	all I could find close by the cave."

	"Oh, 	those are rums," the Lady said.

	"Rum!" 	Rhythm said. "You can't drink that!"

	"Neither 	can you," Cyrus told her.

	"Oh, 	yeah?" She brought out the Decade spell and invoked it before 	he could protest. Her loose dress became tight in places before she 	remembered and changed its size,

	"Now 	that's an impressive transformation," the Lady said. "But 	about that rum: I see one of them is a Deco, Kadence could sip that 	without being adversely affected."

	"I'm 	thirsty," Kadence said.

	"Oh, 	drink the Decorum, then," Rhythm said petulantly. She 	took one of the others from the girl's 	hands and sipped it, "This is fantastic."

	"That's 	Fulc rum," the Lady said, "It generally serves as the 	turning point of evening festivities,"

	"That's 	for me ." Rhythm took a big sip.

	Cyrus 	took the third one, "That is Cereb," the lady said. "Be 	careful; it goes to your head."

	"Cerebrum," 	he agreed, trying it. Indeed, he felt smarter already.

	"Let's 	get turning," Rhythm said, almost slopping her rum as she tried 	to embrace him.

	"You 	are being disgustingly obvious. Mother," Kadence complained.

	The 	Lady smiled, 	"Come dear, we shall play a game of 	nineteen questions while they 	do what we have 	no notion about."

	Cyrus 	was getting to like the dragon. He gulped down the rest of his 	mind-enhancing drink, and Rhythm finished hers, and they embraced. 	In the background they heard Kadence and the Lady playing the game 	of questions.

	Once 	the intensity of the ellipsis 	wore off. Rhythm spoke. "Are you 	really going to write her into a play?"

	"Of 	course. I think it would be nice to have a play with a genuine 	dragon in it."

	"But 	what about the night mare you were thinking of?"

	"This 	is better."

	"Much 	better," Melete agreed.

	Then 	they slept, carefully doing it before the Decade spell wore off so 	that they could lie together embraced without doing anything 	contrary to the Adult Conspiracy. Actually the Conspiracy was 	wearing rather thin, but they pretended not to notice.

	And, 	lying embraced, with Melete back, Cyrus dreamed creatively and 	romantically,

	John 	was lonely. So when he learned that he could participate in a vast 	communal programmed dream populated by other lonely folk, he was 	happy to do it. He took a Happy Dreams pill and lay down on his bed 	to sleep.

	Soon 	he found himself in a pleasant dreamscape, a scene set on the 	surface of a giant floating cloud, where trees grew, rivers ran, and 	nothing bad ever happened. People were everywhere, playing games, 	eating meals, and dating. All of them were quite attractive, so that 	he hesitated to approach them, because he was distinctly ordinary.

	A 	handsome, friendly looking man approached him, "You're new 	here," the man said.

	"I 	just arrived," John agreed. "How did you know?"

	"Because 	you're just a blob of vapor," The man held up a mirror.

	John 	looked at himself. He was a blob of vapor. "Oops. I didn't 	realize, I thought I would just be myself,"

	"No, 	You can be anything except yourself. 	That's the rule,"

	"But 	how can I be anything other than myself?"

	"You 	need an Avatar."

	"A 	what?"

	"An 	image, a personality, that others can see and hear and interact 	with. It can be anything you want. Most folk want to be handsome, 	beautiful, noble, wealthy, whatever. Choose, and it shall be so. 	Then you can interact with others on an equal basis,"

	"But 	in real life I'm not like that."

	"No 	one here is. That's the point: here you must be what you want to be. 	Everyone is,"

	"That 	doesn't seem very realistic."

	The 	man looked at him condescendingly. "Realism is hardly the 	point. This is a dream."

	So 	it was. "Thank you," John said, "I'd just like to be 	moderately tolerably handsome. Nothing special."

	"That's 	too close to your real nature. Try again."

	"How 	do you know my real nature?"

	"Im 	in your dream, remember. Now try to take this more seriously."

	"I 	am taking 	it seriously. I never wanted to be more than I am. I just want to be 	accepted for nhal I 	am. And I'm ordinary."

	"Bad 	attitude,'' the man said, and drifted away.

	So 	John formed a modest Avatar somewhat but not pertectly similar to 	himself and walked on, uncertain whether he really liked this dream. 	If he couldn't be himself in his own dream, what was the point?

	A 	pretty young woman approached him. "May I talk to you?" 	she asked.

	"Sure," 	he said, gratified that he wasn't being ignored, "I'm John."

	"I'm 	Marsha. I noticed that you gave the dream monitor a hard time."

	"I 	didn't mean to. I just wanted to be myself,"

	"Why?"

	"Because 	if I'm no good as myself, I'm no good as a faked-up Avatar. Maybe 	that's a stupid reason."

	"No, 	no, it's a great reason. I wish I had thought of it. Then I would 	have been different."

	"But 	you look and sound fine."

	"Yes, 	but it's fake. I'm nothing at all like this in real life. I 	capitulated to the requirement, and made myself—" She 	shrugged. "Like this."

	So 	she was another ordinary person. "You're welcome to be whatever 	you want to be. I don't hold it against you."

	"Oh, 	thank you!" she said, and impulsively kissed him.

	He 	reeled and almost fell. She had to hold him tight to keep him 	standing, "Sorry," he gasped. "I—no girl ever 	kissed me like that before."

	"I 	apologize. I just got carried away. I won't do it again.''

	"No, 	no, no, no! I liked it. I'm just surprised that you did it. I'm so 	ordinary."

	"You 	liked it?" she asked. "May I do it again?"

	"Uh, 	sure, if you really want to."

	She 	wrapped her arms about him, pressed her nice body close to his, and 	kissed him passionately. He reeled again, but couldn't fall as long 	as she was holding him so firmly. "Oh, this is so much fun!" 	she said, and kissed him yet again.

	"Yes!" 	he agreed, and kissed her back.

	After 	that, one thing led to another, and they found themselves in a 	miniature dream castle that formed around them, providing them 	privacy from other Dreamers. Soon they were both naked and trying to 	see how many storks they could signal with a single effort.

	"I'm 	glad this is a dream," John said. "Because if it were 	real, we could be in trouble with the Stork Works."

	"That's 	one advantage of dreaming," Marsha agreed. "We're not 	really doing it, so we can do whatever we want, no matter how 	naughty."

	They 	lay beside each other and talked, discovering many common interests 	and some wildly divergent ones. John liked mechanical puzzles; 	Marsha liked hunting. He was nervous about the night jungle; she 	loved it. But their differences seemed only to enhance their mutual 	attraction.

	At 	last it was time for the dream to end; they had talked away the 	night. "May I see you again?" John asked her,

	"I'd 	love that," Marsha said, "I'll be right here tomorrow 	night."

	"Then 	it's a date," he agreed, and kissed her again. And found 	himself kissing his pillow as he woke up. It was dawn.

	All 	day he was in a daze, thinking about his nocturnal experience, 	Marsha was such a woman! So maybe in life she didn't look exactly 	the way she did in the dream. Did it matter? She was a really nice 	person, and she actually liked him.

	The 	following night he took the communal dream pill again, and soon he 	was back on the clouds. There was Marsha waiting for him. "Oh, 	I was so afraid you wouldn't come!" she exclaimed, kissing him.

	"I 	was afraid you wouldn't."

	"Oh, 	I had to! It's so utterly nice to be appreciated the way you 	appreciate me, even if it is all illusion."

	"It's 	a dream, but maybe not illusion," he said, "I really do 	like you, Marsha."

	"And 	I really do like you, John. But maybe you wouldn't like me if you 	saw me in real life. No man ever has."

	"Maybe 	those other men were stupid."

	"No, 	they were afraid."

	He 	laughed. "Afraid of you? They never gave you a chance."

	"True," 	she agreed sadly. "That's why I came to the dream, and a false 	Avatar. I must say it has worked beautifully." .

	"Beautifully," 	he agreed, kissing her.

	"What 	do you have in mind today?" she inquired. "We have talked 	and we have clasped."

	"There's 	something else?" he asked, surprised.

	"Once 	we have done something, doesn't it get dull? I assumed you would 	want to do something else."

	"It 	doesn't get dull," he said. "Not for me, anyway. But if 	you are tired of it—"

	"Oh." 	The miniature castle formed around them. "I am inexperienced in 	this kind of interaction, and don't really know what's what. You are 	the first man I have done either much talking or storking with.''

	"You're 	great at both," he said, kissing her avidly.

	"I'm 	so pleased," she said, kissing him back. "I don't want to 	be boring for you."

	"Never 	that!" He proceeded to storkly interest, and she cooperated 	more than willingly. Soon they were both pleasantly exercised.

	"But 	when you do get tired of it, do let me know." Marsha said. "I 	like being with you so much, I never want to wear you out."

	He 	concluded that she was naive in the manner of women about the extent 	of male interest. "I will." Then they talked, and he told 	her more about himself, surprised and pleased that she showed so 	much interest, and learned more about her It seemed that she lived 	alone in the jungle and had little contact with others. She was 	insatiably hungry for friendly interaction. But she never quite said 	exactly where she lived, or why she seemed to have no fam- ily. 	There were other oddities, but they merely added to the pleasant 	little mysteries of her.

	They 	spent the night together, and John felt no desire to go out in the 	dream world to meet others. Marsha was all he needed. When the night 	ended, they agreed to meet again the next 	night.

	This 	continued for some time. Finally John realized that he had to have a 	serious talk with Marsha.

	"Oh, 	no!" she wailed. "You're tired of me!"

	"By 	no means," he said. "My problem is the opposite. I think I 	have fallen in love with you."

	"But 	you don't know me, only my Avatar."

	"I 	know your personality. You're a nice girl, and you're always 	wonderfully nice to me. Unless that's all an act—"

	"No. 	no! No act. I feel the same about you too. But there's something I 	haven't told you."

	"Whatever 	it is, I don't think it will stop me from loving you. I admit it 	will be difficult if you're secretly married, or eighty years old."

	She 	laughed. "Neither one. I'm your age and single. But you see, 	when I told too much, no other man had any interest in me. So I 	didn't dare tell you."

	"Even 	if you're ugly—"

	"I'm 	not. But—"

	"What 	is it?" he demanded. "Tell me, and let me judge."

	She 	winced, then visibly nerved herself. "You do have a right to 	know, though it could destroy our relationship. First let me say 	that I am more than willing to continue as we have been doing, 	meeting here, talking, and clasping. I love being close to you. I 	love pleasing you. I love you. So if you can find it in your heart 	to foi;give me—"

	"What 	is it?" he repeated firmly,

	"I'm 	a dragon."

	He 	gazed at her, "A what?"

	"A 	dragon. I'm not human. So I can never be with you physically, only 	here in the Dream, with my human Avatar. Now you know." She 	waited, flinching, anticipating his reaction.

	"You're—a—dragon 	lady," he said, now seeing how the hints about her nature came 	together. Living alone in a cave in the jungle, liking to hunt, men 	afraid of her. Now it made sense. No wonder she had concealed her 	identity. "What kind?"

	"Old-fashioned 	fire-breathing, about twenty feet long, with wings. I'm a winged 	monster,"

	"But 	then why—why associate with my kind, even in a dream? Why go 	to all this trouble to—to please me? Letting me kiss you. and 	all? Surely you'd rather toast and eat me."

	"I 	don't eat humans. Too dangerous. They send dragon killers after 	rogue dragons, armed with devastating spells. I stick to crows and 	rats, mostly, and the occasional troll."

	"I 	can see how that would get dull. But to let me—have my way 	with you, when in real life you could chomp me, I'm so puny compared 	to you."

	"You're 	so smart compared to me. Haven't you noticed how I'm always agreeing 	with you? That's because I'm not awfully good at thinking for 	myself."

	"I 	thought it was because we shared experiences."

	"The 	only experience we share is here in the Dream."

	"Bleep!" 	he swore. "This can never be. But I still—" He broke 	off, appalled by the realization, then plowed on. "I still love 	you."

	"You 	don't have to say that." Marsha said. "Just don't hate me. 	I'll do anything you want." Her bare Avatar spread her arms 	appealingly.

	"You 	really do love me? Despite my not being a dragon? I should think 	you'd prefer to make it with another dragon."

	"Do 	you know how dragons do it? It's more like rape. Scorching, steamy, 	smoky scenes are literal. It can take weeks to recover. You are so 	tenderly gentle."

	"But 	isn't it your nature to scorch and chomp? Feeble kissing must 	disgust you."

	"It 	is supposed to be my nature." she agreed. "I always felt 	guilty for wanting something else. I couldn't get it with my own 	kind. So I joined the communal Dream and took a human Avatar. I know 	there are other animals doing the same. Then when I saw you appear, 	and knew you didn't know your way about yet, I—I hoped you 	wouldn't mind, once you really got to know me."

	"I 	don't. I'm glad to know you. You're a better woman than any other 	I've known."

	She 	blushed. "You don't have to say that."

	"I 	said it because I mean it. You're ideal for me."

	She 	kissed him repeatedly. "Thank you, thank you!"

	"And 	you really do love me, at least in the Dream?"

	"I 	do. John. You have treated me so well. I know you would have 	preferred a human.

	"I'm 	not sure I would," he said slowly. "No woman ever treated 	me the way you do. They found me too plain and dull."

	"You 	were never that to me!"

	It 	seemed to be true. What reason would she have to deceive him? "May 	I kiss you, knowing what you are?"

	"Oh, 	yes, John!"

	He 	kissed her, and her lips were just as sweet as they had been. He 	wrapped his arms about her, and her body was just as nice. Soon they 	were back in stork territory. Did dragons signal storks, or eat 	them?

	"What 	about an accommodation spell?" he asked as they rested.

	She 	understood exactly what he meant. "It would make it possible to 	do this physically. But you would still be a man, and I'd still be a 	dragon. It would be unnatural. I much prefer just being with you in 	the Dream, in a form that pleases you."

	"Could 	we get a transformation spell? So you could become a real woman, or 	I a dragon?"

	"It 	wouldn't work, John," she said regretfully. "I know 	nothing about real human society, and you'd never make it as a 	dragon. I'd be chomping things and you'd soon get toasted. We are 	what we are, regardless of our forms."

	He 	had to concede the point. "Then can we make a life together 	here in the Dream?"

	"But 	we're both asleep!"

	"Our 	bodies are, but our minds are awake. Marsha, let's get married—in 	the Dream. Let's have a family here."

	"But 	what of our real lives?"

	"They 	will proceed as before. It can be our secret, that our real lives 	are in the Dream."

	They 	hashed it over, and finally she agreed. They went to the Dream 	authorities, and set it up, and in due course had a Dream marriage 	attended by other Dreamers, who understood. They signaled a Dream 	Stork, and—

	Then 	he was back in his real life. The night had ended, and with it the 	Dream. He was Cyrus again, not John.





	Chapter 11: Play


	I 	just had the wildest dream," Cyrus exclaimed as he carefully 	let go of Rhythm so as not to seem to be clasping a child. "I 	think it will make a perfect play for the Lady."

	"Oh, 	tell me!" the dragon exclaimed, delighted.

	He 	described the dream in detail as they ate hot cross buns and hot nog 	for breakfast. They had gotten accustomed to the heat of the cave.

	"So 	they decided to have a family in the Dream," he concluded. 	"He'll still be a man, and she'll still be a dragon, but in the 	dream they can live together and have dream children and all. It's a 	happy compromise."

	"It's 	a derivative of your own situation," Melete said severely.

	The 	Lady's ears perked. "Is someone else here?"

	"Better 	let her in," Rhythm murmured to the Muse.

	"Let 	me introduce myself," Melete said, extending her 	perceptibility. "I am the Writer's Block you returned to Cyrus. 	I enable him to write his plays."

	"Oh," 	the Lady said. "I had no idea you could talk."

	"I 	normally talk only to him. But you need to hear this too. It's not 	really a story about you; it's about his forbidden love. He can't 	let others know he loves a child, so he has sublimated it in the 	dream, which he now proposes to render into a play. Instead of a 	child, the lady is a dragon. Its an attempt to justify his illicit 	passion."

	"But 	she has a spell to make her older," the Lady said. "So 	it's all right."

	"But 	he knows she's really a child. That's what makes it not all right."

	"Oh, 	come off it. Muse," Kadence said. "They're in love. Who 	cares how old anyone is?"

	'The 	Adult Conspiracy cares."

	"But 	technically there's no Violation." the Lady said, "Just as 	there's no man/dragon problem in the play. It's all in the Dream. 	Forbidden love is forbidden love, and it's great drama. I don't care 	if there's a parallel. I think it's a great play and I love it."

	"So 	do I." Kadence said.

	"Just 	make sure you get a cute actress to play my Avatar in the Dream, and 	a handsome actor to love her."

	"But 	I thought you were going to act in it," Kadence said.

	"I'll 	be there, curling around the stage. I'll speak my part, once the 	audience learns that I'm Marsha. That way I'll be a dragon playing 	the part of a girl. It's wonderful."

	Melete 	sighed. "Have it your way. But I'll expect something more 	original for the third play. I have to protect my reputation, after 	all."

	They 	made an arrangement with the Lady to meet her at the Troupe, and 	resumed their trek. Now that they did not need to search for Melete, 	they were free to take whatever paths were most convenient.

	They 	came to a clearing wherein a number of people sat. A man stepped 	forward to meet them. "Hello, I am a Talent Scout. Do you need 	a new talent?"

	Cyrus 	was tempted to brush on by, but paused. "I'm not sure I have an 	old talent, other than merely existing. I'm a cyborg. Half human, 	half machine."

	"Everybody 	has a talent," the man said. "I can readily check yours. 	Give me your hand."

	Bemused, 	Cyrus extended his hand. The scout took it and concentrated, "There 	it is. You can change one thing in any person's memory. It has to be 	a small thing, though, because big things have too many extensions 	and affect other things."

	"Just 	like that, you know?" Cyrus asked, not believing it.

	"It's 	my talent to know," the Scout said. "You can readily 	verify it. Change someone's memory."

	Cyrus 	shook his head. "I doubt I can, but in any event, I wouldn't."

	"If 	you have no use for it. I will gladly arrange a trade. That's why I 	set up my Talent Agency." He gestured around the clearing. "How 	about the talent of controlling a wisp of fog? That can be fun. 	especially if you make it dance. Or if it happens to be a forget 	whorl."

	"I 	don't think—"

	"How 	about the talent of conjuring assorted cloths?" the scout 	asked, refusing to be put off. "Your little girl would like 	that, wouldn't she? Or to make any cloth as hard as steel. That 	would protect her."

	"I 	don't need those," Kadence said.

	"Or 	of doing something perfectly on the first try." the Scout said. 	"Though I have to tell you, thereafter it is apt to mess up. 	That's why the owner 	wants to trade it."

	"I 	don't need that either," Kadence said.

	She 	finally got the man's attention. "Why not? Let me check your 	talent. It is surely worth trading," He put his hand on her 	arm. "Oh, my! You're a Sorceress!"

	Cyrus 	acted before he thought about it, changing the 	man's memory of what he had discovered to 	a lesser thing, "You make ants march in step," the Scout 	said, not realizing, "That's interesting, though not really 	useful. You will surely want to trade. How about the ability to 	invoke the talent of dead people?"

	"We'll 	trade," one of two young men said 	from the bench. 	"I'm In Crease; I make others gain weight, size, or whatever. 	This is my twin brother De Crease; he makes them lose it."

	"But 	those are good talents," Kadence protested. "Why would you 	want to trade them?"

	"Because 	we can affect only others, not ourselves," De Crease said. "We 	remain ordinary. That frustrates us no end. But maybe we could have 	some fun with ants."

	Kadence 	considered. "I think I'd stay dull 	too, so I guess I don't want to trade." She was of course being 	careful not to give away her real 	reason.

	"How 	about my talent?" a man asked. "I'm Pete. My talent is 	unbreak- ing. I don't mean mending 	or healing; I mean that I make it so it was never broken.''

	"Say," 	Kadence said. "I could use that when I accidentally drop a 	precious vase."

	"You 	could," Pete agreed.

	"You'd 	do better just learning to be more careful," Cyrus told her.

	Kadence 	sighed. "I guess so."

	"Then 	how about us?" a boy asked. "I am Melvin. I can read the 	minds of women. My sister Megan can read the minds of men."

	"But 	those are great talents," Kadence said. "Why trade?"

	"Because 	all the men are interested in only one thing," Megan said. "I 	get so tired of it."

	"One 	thing?" Kadence asked, intrigued. "What is that?"

	"My 	sister is six years old," Rhythm said firmly.

	Megan 	nodded faintly, revising her answer. "Panties."

	"Panties?" 	Kadence asked. "They're dull!"

	"Precisely," 	Megan agreed with an obscure smile.

	"Actually 	that's not true," Melvin said, "We are also interested 	in—"

	Megan 	stepped on his toe. "Blouses," she said.

	"Uh, 	yes," he agreed, wincing. "While all women are interested 	in is—"

	Now 	Rhythm interceded. She made the people lose interest in them. They 	walked on by, and they paid no attention.

	"Beep," 	Kadence muttered.

	Only 	when they were well clear did Melete speak. "The talent Scout 	meant well, and has a business many folk will patronize, but he was 	dangerous for us."

	"Yes, 	because our talents give away our identities," Rhythm said. 	"That's why I kept my mouth mostly shut ."

	"But 	he did me a favor," Cyrus said. "He identified my talent, 	when I didn't even know I had one. I can change one thing in a 	person's memory. I used it on him."

	"Good 	thing you did," Rhythm said. "I was about to blank out his 	memory of the whole day. Your way was better."

	"Still, 	being able to play with wisps of fog might be nice," Kadence 	said.

	Rhythm 	glared at her. but the girl burst out giggling. She had been joking. 	Maybe.

	"But 	you know, that was a 	danger," Cyrus said. "Even though the Scout meant well. 	Just as the Dragon Lady meant well, but that could have been 	dangerous if she had been a normal dragon."

	"Something 	is still putting threats in our way," Rhythm agreed. "But 	they aren't really effective threats. That's odd."

	"As 	if someone wants us to get into mischief seemingly by accident." 	Cyrus said. "An attack by a ravening monster would make it too 	obvious."

	"Too 	obvious," she agreed, nodding. "But whatever is doing it 	is not obvious either. I can't get a fix on it; there seems to be 	nothing there. Maybe I should get my sisters' help."

	But 	 Cyrus was wary of that. Melody and Harmony were too much like 	Rhythm, and entirely too interested in his 	and Rhythm's romantic life. "I have another idea: this is 	almost like a curse. Curtis Curse Friend is part of a culture that 	works constantly with curses. We should hurry back and ask him."

	"But 	I would have to use heavy magic," Rhythm said.

	"It 	was just an idea," he said. "I'm glad to be with you 	anywhere."

	She 	smiled. "Let's proceed carefully. If we don't encounter any 	more dangers, okay. But if we do, then I'll think again."

	"It's 	fun being out here, as a family," Kadence said.

	"Yes 	it is," Rhythm said, hugging her, then hugging Cyrus. "I 	 can love both of you openly, without anyone challenging my age or 	identity."

	And 	that was the great thing about this excursion. Cyrus realized. 	Just being together, openly loving each other, without having to 	hide it.

	Exactly, 	Rhythm agreed mentally.

	They 	came to a river that barred their way. "Make a boat?" 	Cyrus asked. "I don't think it would be safe to swing across."

	"There 	might be loan sharks or allegations." Rhythm agreed. "Things 	with teeth."

	"Look!" 	Kadence exclaimed. "Water moccasins!"

	Cyrus 	looked, alarmed, but it was only a patch of shoe-sized flowers, 	including dainty lady slippers and yes. snakelike water moccasins.

	Kadence 	picked a pair and put them on her feet. She stepped on the water. 	The moccasins enabled her to walk on the water.

	"I 	think we have our way to cross without swimming," Cyrus said.

	They 	all donned water moccasins and started across the river. But then a 	dragon came charging toward them. It was translucent and ripply.

	Rhythm 	raised one hand. The dragon paid no heed.

	"Heed 	the warning, for your own sake, dragon," Cyrus murmured. But 	the dragon didn't.

	A 	beam of color flashed from Rhythm's hand. It struck the dragon. The 	dragon's snoot flashed into steam, and the rest of it splashed into 	the water.

	"It 	was a water dragon!" Cyrus exclaimed. "Made of water."

	"It 	could still have chomped us with icicle teeth," Rhythm said 	grimly. "That does it. There's too much danger here. I'm using 	magic to take us back to camp."

	"Make 	it safely beyond camp," Melete said. "So they won't know."

	Rhythm 	nodded. "Take my hand," she said.

	Cyrus 	and Kadence took her hands. Then they were standing in the glade 	with the love spring, where Rhythm had first seduced him. "Oh, 	my," he said, remembering.

	Rhythm 	caught his thought. "Muse, take Kadence for a walk on the 	water." she said. "It's safe. Don't look back."

	They 	were all still wearing the water moccasins. Kadence took Melete from 	his pocket and walked out on the pond, not looking back. Rhythm led 	him by the hand to the spot.

	"You 	mean—" he asked, violently hoping.

	The 	spell was already there, and she was biting into it. The vapor 	puffed and she was grown and beautiful. "What else?"

	When 	he was able to speak again, after an especially intense ellipsis, he 	felt some faint regret, "You know we really shouldn't be doing 	this. I know your real age."

	"Do 	you have a choice?"

	"No." 	It was true. She was a Sorceress, and increasingly he was coming to 	appreciate the depth and breadth of that. She could do things he had 	never thought of, and he was powerless to resist anything she really 	wanted. She was a child, but he was nevertheless her captive.

	"It's 	true," she said, "You were mine from the moment I realized 	I wanted you. The stork was right to haul me up on charges, not you; 	I always controlled the situation."

	"You 	always did," he agreed, "When I called you a child—that 	wasn't what made you mad, was it?"

	"I 	knew you would say that, giving me a pretext to react, I had already 	brought you here, after all."

	"You 	already had," he agreed. "Oh, Rhythm, I don't know how I'm 	ever going to wait until you are truly of age. I love you."

	"You're 	not mad that I made you love me?"

	"With 	that first adult kiss? No. I think I was already on the way to it. I 	was trying to fight it, but there was just something about you."

	"With 	a spell on your mind."

	He 	stared at her "Rhythm! You didn't!"

	She 	looked guilty. "I did. It's like the losing-interest magic I 	use on folk who might get too curious about my identity, only this 	is positive. Intensifying interest."

	"That's 	why I thought you were a winsome girl, and felt guilty!"

	"You 	tried so hard to be honorable. I love that."

	"But 	you really are a 	child! I love you, but you are. You should not have done that."

	"I 	can reverse it. if you wish."

	He 	pondered that. A spell to make him no longer love her? "Objectively. 	I see that that would make sense. But subjectively I can't stand the 	thought. And what about Kadence?"

	"No 	reversal," she agreed. "Suppose I have my sisters get 	together and fashion a spell that would age me permanently? Then I 	would never be a child."

	"But 	I love you as you are, even though it's forbidden. And what about 	the mission to save Xanth? Your age would give away your nature, and 	that would mess up the mission,"

	She 	sighed. "You're hard to satisfy. I love that too."

	"We'll 	just have to muddle through, as we have been doing, guilt and all."

	"Before 	the hour ends," she said, and kissed him. That made him realize 	that she had always controlled every part of their relationship. And 	he loved it.

	At 	least she always invoked the Decade spell before clasping him. Or 	did she? She had an illusion spell too. He had a sudden horrible 	thought. "Rhythm—did you ever use illusion instead of 	aging?"

	"No, 	Not for this."

	That 	was a vast relief.

	"But 	I tried. The Adult Conspiracy wouldn't let me."

	"You 	tried?" he asked, horrified. "Tried to seduce me when you 	remained a child?"

	"Yes."

	"Why?"

	"So 	I would remember the details. Cyrus, I love you, but as a child I 	can't remember most of what we do when I'm adult. Only that it 	involves holding and kissing, and I can do that anyway. And that 	Panties relate, though I have no idea how; they don't seem to exist 	in my memory." She smiled grimly, "As an adult I know why 	they're absent, but that gets lost when I revert. It drives me crazy 	not knowing. I can't stand losing any part of you, even part of a 	memory. If I did it as a child, I would remember. Then I would 	know."

	"That's 	sweet. But don't try it again." He was overwhelmingly relieved 	to know that he had never touched her as a child.

	"Of 	 course you could simply tell me exactly what happened, 	after I revert. Then I wouldn't have to 	.scheme to try to find out." "No.' '

	She 	frowned. "You're riling me."

	"Better 	that, than a true Violation. You're adult now; you understand."

	"I 	do," she agreed grudgingly, "But I don't when I'm young."

	And 	she remained a Sorceress when she was young. He had to beware of 	her.

	"You 	do," she agreed, kissing him.

	The 	hour ended, and she reverted, "You're not going to tell me," 	she said,

	"I'm 	not," he agreed.

	She 	frowned, and there was a rumble of thunder in the background, "If 	I didn't love you, I might do this to you."

	An 	unseen force took hold of him and lifted him off the ground. It 	shook him,

	"I'm 	glad you're not doing that to me," he gasped.

	She 	had to laugh, breaking the mood, and he returned to the ground. Then 	she lunged forward and kissed him, hard. "But I do love you," 	she said.

	She 	was, indeed, a child, with childish impulses. Fortunately he was 	adult. She needed that discipline.

	"I 	do," she agreed.

	Kadence 	returned with Melete. "Time to return to the troupe," the 	Muse said. "Time for you to stop playing and write your play,"

	'Time," 	Cyrus agreed.

	They 	walked to the camp. No one inquired about their absence. This was 	more evidence of Rhythm's sometimes frightening range of powers as a 	Sorceress.

	Cyrus 	sought out Curtis. "We were out walking," he said, "and 	there kept being dangers, especially to Kadence, I thought maybe 	it's a curse. You're a curse friend, so I thought this might be in 	your area. Can you help me'?"

	"Let 	me examine the child," Curtis said.

	Kadence 	approached, and the man put a hand on her head. "It's 	definitely a curse," he said. "I feel its ambiance. Let me 	check my reference." He fetched a tome, "Yes, here it is. 	This is interesting."

	"Curses 	are listed in a book?" Cyrus asked.

	"It 	is our business," Curtis said a trifle stiffly,

	"Of 	course. I just didn't realize that that sort of thing could be 	tabulated."

	"It 	is a magic reference, automatically updated," the Curse Friend 	said. "Let me provide some necessary background. The Muse of 	History, Clio, was cursed to suffer some danger every day of her 	life. Fortunately she had the means to handle those threats. Later 	she got together with a Magician who reversed that curse, and it has 	lain fallow for several years. It seems that someone has 	appropriated it and applied it to Kadence. It is an opportunistic 	curse, adapting whatever is convenient, and not always aptly."

	"Not 	aptly?" Cyrus asked.

	"For 	example, if there is a dragon nearby, it will lead the subject to 	the dragon," Curtis explained. "But the dragon may not be 	hungry at the moment, so does not consume the victim. The curse 	isn't smart about such details."

	"That's 	exactly how it is," Cyrus said. "We encountered a friendly 	dragon we recruited for the next play."

	"The 	next play!"

	"She'll 	be here in another day or so," Cyrus said. "She talks. I 	have worked out a play with her as the lead female."

	"So 	you weren't wasting your time during your absence."

	"I 	never know in what manner inspiration will come. Can you stop the 	curse?"

	"Oh, 	yes, now that I have identified it. I will simply disconnect it from 	Kadence so it can't find her any more. But why should anyone want to 	curse such an innocent child?"

	"That's 	what we would like to know," Cyrus said. "At least she's 	safe now."

	"Safe," 	Kadence repeated, relieved.

	But 	later, with Rhythm, he was sure he knew. "Ragna Roc. The bird 	knows about us."

	"I 	don't think so," Rhythm said. "He would simply have 	rendered us all into illusion, instead of doing something relatively 	ineffective like this. Why alert us that he knows, anyway? Why use 	some leftover curse?"

	She 	was right. "How about this: Ragna doesn't know about us, but 	does know that Xanth folk aren't keen on being taken over by him. So 	he got someone to watch out for dangers, and maybe that person found 	this curse, and oriented it to focus on the greatest danger to 	Ragna?"

	"So 	nobody knows about us. except the curse, and it's not very smart." 	She nodded. "So we're safe, for now. Except—"

	"Except 	why did it focus on Kadence? It should have oriented on you."

	"On 	me," she agreed. "She's a Sorceress, but making ants or 	people walk in step isn't going to hurt him. Whereas if I get close 	to him, I'll zap him with a conjured pineapple."

	"Which 	he would render illusionary. And you too."

	"Um," 	she agreed. "Still, Kadence can't be the worst threat. Maybe 	the curse got the wrong person."

	"Maybe," 	he said. "At least she's safe now,"

	"Yes." 	But she seemed uncertain.

	"Now 	write that play," Melete said.

	Cyrus 	got to work and wrote the play. It was rapid, because he already had 	it worked out.

	Next 	day the Dragon Lady arrived, Cyrus had warned the troupe, so there 	was only muted alarm. He went out to greet her, and escorted her to 	the campsite. "This is the Dragon Lady," he said. "She 	will be the lead lady in the play."

	"Hello," 	the dragon said shyly. "I'll stay away except during 	rehearsals. Hunting, you know."

	The 	other members of the troupe were happy to leave it at that.

	Cyrus 	had Tuff, the volcanic rock salesman, try out for the lead male. 	Tuff had done all right playing the King in the prior play, and was 	getting into acting. But who would do for the Avatar of the lead 	lady?

	"Let 	me!" Piper said.

	"No 	way," the Witch said protectively. "You're thirteen. This 	role requires kissing and simulated romance."

	"But 	nobody will really summon the stork on stage before an audience." 	Piper protested.

	'The 	implication will nevertheless be there," the Witch said. "No 	child can play this role."

	A 	cloud of smoke appeared. "What child is playing with her 	bread?"

	"Playing 	with her what?" Piper asked innocently.

	"Wafer, 	toast, loaf, pastry, bun—"

	"Roll?"

	"Whatever," 	the cloud agreed, crossly.

	"That's 	role, not roll," the Witch said.

	'That's 	what I said," the cloud said, forming into a dark lovely 	demoness.

	Oh, 	no. "We are casting roles for the play, Metria." Cyrus 	said. "You wouldn't be interested." And knew as he said it 	that he shouldn't have.

	"Oh? 	Try me."

	So 	he explained. "We need a nice-looking girl who will be mute. 	All her lines will be spoken by a talking dragon, who is the real 	Lady. The actress will represent the Avatar, an image the Dragon 	Lady crafts to participate in a big dream."

	"Demons 	and Dragons!" Metria said. "I love that dream!"

	"Rehearsals 	will be long and boring. She'll just have to pretend to talk."

	"And 	kiss," Piper said, pouting. "They won't let me. Something 	about the stork."

	"I 	can kiss," Metria said. "I have no fear of storks. In fact 	I can freak out any man with just my panties." Her smoky dress 	evaporated to reveal bright red panties with flickering blue stars.

	"No!" 	Cyrus cried, too late. He had already freaked. His gaze was locked 	on the wicked sight.

	Then 	a hand covered his eyes, breaking the contact. "Nobody freaks 	you out but me," Rhythm murmured. Then she fired a glance that 	caused the panties to catch on fire. The demoness puffed back into 	smoke with an outraged bleep.

	"Thank 	you, child," he said, reminding her to conceal her nature.

	Meanwhile 	women were doing the same for the men. all of whom had similariy 	freaked out.

	"No 	panties, Metria,'' Cyrus said. "She's a nice girl.''

	"Nice 	girls also have panties," the demoness said, re-forming. "Even 	if they're hidden." But her dress was back, intact. "So do 	I have the role?"

	What 	could he do? "You can try it. If you foul up, or do anything 	mischievous, I'll boot you out of the play."

	"I'd 	like to see you try." She posed, with her backside ready for 	booting. "You'd get your foot stuck in it."

	That 	was surely no bluff, "I mean I would deny you the part. You 	must play it straight."

	"Whoo, 	mee?" the demoness asked, assuming an owl shape before fading 	out.

	"We 	may regret this," Rhythm muttered,

	"I 	already regret it. But maybe it's better to have her cooperating 	than interfering."

	The 	actors were given a few days to memorize their lines, while the 	workers set up the dream set, consisting of foamy clouds fashioned 	from extremely diffuse tuff. It was surprising how varied volcanic 	rock could be; some of it was mostly solidified gas.

	Then 	came rehearsal. The Dragon Lady curled around the stage, concealed 	by clouds. In the center was a little pavilion, substituting for the 	closed mini-castle, because a real castle wasn't feasible and 	anyway, the audience needed to see the actors. Overall, it was a 	full-sized but quite simple setting.

	John, 	played by Tuff, stood beside the stage. "I'll never get a 	girlfriend," he proclaimed in the manner necessary to reach the 	full audience, "I'm just an ordinary dull man with no special 	talent." After a pause, he resumed. "So I'm going to try 	one of these dream pills, so I can sleep and enter a communal dream 	where maybe things will be better."

	John 	made a production of swallowing a pill. Then he lay down beside the 	stage, disappearing from view. But in a moment he reappeared on the 	stage: he was in the dream.

	In 	due course the girl approached him: Marsha. She was innocently 	pretty, projecting niceness. That was surely a real effort for the 	actress. Demoness Metria, but she managed it. She herself didn't 	talk, which spared the audience her fouled-up vocabulary; instead 	she gestured theatrically, and it was the Dragon Lady's voice that 	spoke. Because the hidden dragon's head was close to the actress, it 	seemed as if the actress was talking.

	In 	due course John and Marsha entered the pavilion and started kissing, 	certain they were unobserved, in the manner of dramatic 	presentation. They were obviously an ideal couple. But as the play 	progressed, and they became closer acquaintances, Marsha's evasions 	about her physical identity became evident. Then the dragon raised 	her head, and the covering clouds fell away to reveal her full body 	surrounding the stage. The audience could see that she was the one 	talking, not the Avatar. John, however, on stage, remained 	dramatically unaware.

	This 	was only the first rehearsal, watched by stagehands and other 	members of the troupe.

	But 	even they gave a small gasp as they realized that John was falling 	in love with a dragon. Cyrus was thrilled; it was working.

	Then 	came the revelation that John understood, and his problem accepting 	it. But when he finally was reconciled, and kissed Marsha knowing 	that she was really a dragon, there was a small moan of appreciation 	from the limited audience. They understood that this was truly 	forbidden love, and sympathized with the lovers.

	When 	the play was done, the actors took their bows, and the Dragon Lady 	bowed her head. The troupe audience applauded; they really liked the 	play.

	"I 	believe this is viable after all," Melete admitted grudgingly. 	"It's derivative of your own situation, but the audience 	doesn't know that. It's a nice love story."

	"Thank 	you," Cyrus said, relieved. She was always his most severe 	critic. That was of course her nature.

	"However," 	she continued inexorably, "it is axiomatic that a good 	rehearsal can lead to a disaster at the presentation. Anything that 	can go wrong, will,"

	"To 	be sure," he said, not believing it.

	They 	arranged to put on the play at Crabapple's village again, because it 	was the closest, and the villagers had liked the first play. That 	morning Cyrus, Rhythm, and Tuff went to set up the stage, as they 	had done before.

	Tuff 	conjured expansive foam-stone cloudbanks, including enough small 	stuff to cover the dragon for the first portion of the play. Rhythm 	would render the Dragon Lady temporarily invisible so that she could 	take her place without raising a commotion. Cyrus had found another 	spot spell: that was the explanation for the troupe, and they were 	not inclined to question it. thanks to another spot disinterest 	spell.

	'The 	Lady's head will be here." Cyrus said. "We need to move 	one block aside."

	"No 	sooner said than—" Tuff said, heaving up the block. Then 	he tripped over a lesser block, lost his balance, and fell. Rhythm 	screamed as the boulder block dropped down on his leg. As stone 	went, it was light, but as flesh and bone went, it was all too 	heavy. There was a sickening crunch.

	Tuff 	lay there, writhing in pain. Rhythm ran to help him. "I can—" 	she said.

	"You 	must not. Princess!" Melete cried. "That would show your 	power."

	Rhythm 	paused in midrun, nodding. "Help ease your pain," she 	said. "I've got a spell I keep for emergencies." She 	kneeled beside the man and put her hands on his leg.

	"Oh. 	thank you. Rhyme, you dear child," Tuff said. "That makes 	it bearable."

	"I 	think the Witch has a full healing spell," Rhythm said.

	"No 	she doesn't," he said. "I know her pretty well."

	So 	he did. So they couldn't use that ruse. He would have to remain 	injured until they figured out a legitimate cover for Rhythm's 	magic.

	"I 	could heal it." Piper said. "But it would take weeks for 	an injury that bad. My healing power is more for cuts and scrapes."

	The 	villagers had seen the accident, and were sympathetic. They carried 	him to a cottage where he could rest. This, too, had to be accepted.

	Tuff 	was out of the play.

	"But 	he has the lead part!" Cyrus said. "No one else knows his 	lines."

	"No 	one except you," Melete said. "You wrote them."

	"That's 	not the same. I could garble them."

	"You 	will have a prompter."

	Rhythm 	smiled. "My little sister is very good at that."

	So 	she was. Cyrus sighed. He would have to do it. "When are you 	going to say you told me so?" he asked Melete.

	"Any 	time now," she said, smiling. "Poor Tuff."

	"We'll 	have him healed for the next presentation." Rhythm said. "Even 	if we have to find a hidden cache of healing elixir."

	"Piper 	will find it," Melete said. And that was of course the suitable 	cover for Rhythm's power.

	That 	evening they came to do the play. Rhythm made a spot invisibility 	spell to hide the Dragon Lady, and a supplementary disinterest spell 	so that the other troupe members did not think to question this. 	When the dragon was in place, and suitably covered by foam blocks, 	the spell faded. She needed to be seen, when the time came.

	Because 	Cyrus was acting, Crabapple took over the announcing. "Tonight's 	play is 'The Dream,'" she said. "And no, I am not the 	dream girl." There was laughter.

	The 	play was a success, Cyrus was the only one needing prompting, and 	Kadence was teasingly happy to do it. But there was one problem 	Cyrus was powerless to eliminate.

	It 	was time for John's first hug and kiss with the Marsha Avatar 	Demoness Metria wrapped her arms around him, pulled him very close 	to her heaving bosom, and planted a kiss 	on him that made two of the more sensitive ladies in the audience 	swoon. "Nothing like realism," she whispered 	mischievously.

	Rhythm's 	face, offstage, was studiedly neutral. That was a bad sign. The more 	the demoness smooched him, under cover of the actions prescribed by 	the play, the angrier the Sorceress got. Cyrus knew he was in 	trouble, and he couldn't do anything about it.

	When 	the identity of Marsha was revealed, there was a gasp from the 	audience. But they soon came to accept it: a talking dragon who 	longed for romance. When they finally decided to have a dream family 	that never left the dream, there was applause: it was the right, 	romantic conclusion. When it was done, and the actors took their 	bows, some children even came up to pet the nice dragon. The Lady 	loved it; she was a dramatic success.

	But 	Cyrus dreaded his next session alone with Rhythm. She might be a 	child, but she had strong passions and strong magic, as he knew so 	well. He was in a picklement.





	Chapter 12: Recruiting


	She 	really worked you over," Rhythm said. "It wasn't my 	choice." He doubted that would satisfy her, however. "I'm 	sorry."

	"I'm 	not,"

	He 	was startled. "Not?"

	"I 	got to see some techniques I can remember. Maybe I knew them when 	I'm adult, but I didn't as a child. She was trying to seduce you, 	right there on stage."

	'That 	would have been awkward.'' It was an understatement. What the 	demoness had been doing in the name of acting pushed the limits of 	the Conspiracy. "It won't happen again. I'll get another 	actress."

	"No, 	let her be. She's less mischief there than she would be if you 	provoked her by booting her. Woman Scorned, and all that, you know."

	"I 	know," he agreed weakly. "But—"

	"But 	we'll get Tuff healed, and then she'll be doing it to him, and it'll 	be the Witch's nose disjointed. That'll be fun."

	"So—you're 	not mad?"

	"Furious," 	she said, "But not with you,"

	He 	didn't trust this, "So it's all right, between us?"

	"It's 	all right." But there was an expression on her face that would 	have been better on some other face, "But I may punish you a 	little."

	"Maybe 	I deserve it."

	"Oh?" 	Her glance was sharp. "Why?"

	"Because 	she succeeded in arousing me. Some."

	"Let's 	explore this." The spell appeared, and she bit it open. In half 	a moment she was lusciously adult.

	Then 	she changed. The Demoness appeared in her place.

	"Get 	out of here, Metria!" he said, "You've been more than 	enough trouble aliieady."

	She 	smiled. "I'm not Metria,"

	'That's 	what she would say."

	"Metria 	would emulate me, to fool you into doing it with her. She wouldn't 	appear as herself."

	"That's 	right," he agreed, surprised. "But why would you want to 	appear as her?"

	"To 	punish you, as I said." She stepped into him, pressing close, 	exactly as Metria had. "Did she do this to you, up close?"

	"Yes," 	he said,

	"Did 	you like it?"

	What 	could he say. "Yes. I hated liking it, but I did respond."

	"And 	this?" She kissed him savagely.

	"That, 	too," he agreed.

	"And 	this?"

	"Not 	that," he gasped. "Rhythm, please—"

	But 	she refused to stop until she had seduced him in the form of Metria. 	Only when it was done did she revert to her own appearance. "So 	there," she said.

	"But 	it means Metria could have done it," he protested.

	"I 	don't think so. You knew it was me."

	"Yes, 	but—"

	"You 	would have kicked her out, if it wasn't on stage, and you knew it 	wasn't me."

	"Yes, 	but—"

	"So 	I'm satisfied. I'm sorry I punished you,"

	He 	shook his head, "You ought to be spanked." But he 	knew as he said it that he shouldn't have. She had a thing about 	spanking.

	Sure 	enough, she turned over, exposing her plush bare bottom. "Spank 	me.' '

	"Rhythm, 	stop it!"

	"You 	brought it up. Now you have to do it."

	The 	worst of it was that it was so illicitly tempting. "I 	shouldn't."

	"Would 	you rather have me spank you?"

	"No!" 	And that, in the odd logic of the situation, committed him. He wound 	up spanking her, not hard, and that led into another bout of 	storking. But he still felt horribly guilty.

	Then 	he had a spot revelation. "You put that thought of spanking in 	my mind! That's why it kept occurring to me, when it never did 	before I met you."

	"I'm 	a naughty girl," she agreed, unchastened. "I do deserve 	spanking."

	"But 	the way you set it up, it's not punishment, it's something else."

	"It 	sure is," she agreed languidly.

	He 	saw that there was no point in arguing the case further. She was 	delightfully incorrigible.

	She 	laughed, reading it in his mind, and he had to Join her. He hoped 	she had worked out her ire. He had never been more conscious of both 	her female appeal and the fact she was a Sorceress. He knew she 	loved him, as he loved her, but she was dangerous when riled. It was 	a bad enough situation as it was, without jealous emotion 	interfering.

	Curtis 	dictated that they needed at least three plays in their roster 	before they could tour. So Cyrus had to write one more. He knew it 	would be a struggle, even with Melete's help.

	"Meanwhile 	it is time to arrange the itinerary," the Curse Friend 	continued. "You will be busy with the play and casting, so 	someone else will have to do it. Whom can we spare?"

	"I 	won't know until I know the parts for the third play," Cyrus 	said.

	"Which 	has not yet been written. How about sending Piper?"

	"She's 	a child!" Cyrus protested.

	"Hardly 	the only one. She can ride your mechanical donkey, who should be 	able to protect her, and take along her dust devil friend."

	"But 	she really wants a role in a play."

	The 	man shot him a glance that made him feel like an idiot, "Tell 	her two things: first, that this is a vitally important mission that 	only she can accomplish, and second, that when she returns she will 	have a suitable part."

	'This 	is manipulative!"

	"It 	is my business to get things organized and accomplished."

	So 	it was that Cyrus sent thirteen-year-old Piper Nymph out with Don 	Donkey and Dusty Dust Devil to locate and enlist a number of 	villages to be sites for their tour. The giri was thrilled to be 	entrusted with such an important mission, and promised to do her 	very best. "Understand," he told her, "Don Donkey is 	a robot. He does not eat food, he bums wood."

	"Oh, 	I know,'' Piper said. "We get along fine. He's given me rides."

	"He 	also has a robotic device that enables me to see and hear what he 	sees and hears, when I tune in, and he can give me reports on what 	is happening around him. So if you get in trouble, he'll let me know 	immediately, and we'll arrange to help you."

	"How 	can you help, when we're far apart?"

	"I 	have a spell," Cyrus said. Actually he had Sorceress Rhythm, 	but couldn't say that.

	"Okay."

	"Here 	is a copy of the map that Don has in his data bank," Cyrus 	said, "If you lose it, don't worry; he can print out another. 	It shows all the villages within range, and all the enchanted paths 	you can use to travel safely, and all the safe camps for the nights. 	It also marks the worst dangers to avoid, like tangle trees."

	Piper 	laughed. "You forget, I'm half tree. No tangler would try to 	eat me."

	He 	had forgotten, which was embarrassing, because it was part of the 	reason he thought she would be able to travel safely through the 	forest, "And dragons."

	That 	fazed her. "I'll avoid them." She took the map. Then she 	hesitated, blushing faintly,

	"There's 	a problem?"

	"Rumor 	has it that sometimes you kiss people. For luck, maybe."

	Oh? 	Maybe the original actresses had been gossiping. Did all the girls 	in the troupe have ideas? "But you're—" Oops, he had 	first gotten in trouble by calling a girl a child. "Not 	supposed to know that," he finished.

	"I 	don't," she agreed. "Maybe that's just as well."

	"Just 	as well?"

	"Because 	if I did know, I might do this." She stepped up and kissed him 	firmly on the mouth.

	The 	kiss had impact, partly because of the surprise, partly because she 	was a pretty giri. and partly because he 	feared Rhythm's jealous wrath, but he took it in stride. "Good 	thing you didn't do that," he agreed.

	She 	smiled. "And I'll never say a word about Rhyme disappearing 	from her tent at night and nobody knows where she is or dares 	conjecture."

	"Thank 	you," he said weakly. Now it was clear why the other actresses 	were leaving him alone. But did they think he was corrupting a 	child? "But you know she has that Decade spell, that can age a 	person ten years, for an hour."

	"I 	know. I tried it, remember. Otherwise I might be jealous."

	"I'm 	glad you understand."

	Piper 	mounted Don, and rode away, with Dusty swirling along before, after, 	and to the sides, idly stirring up leaves. Cyrus watched them 	depart, and when they were out of sight, he tuned in on Don to watch 	some more. He saw the foliage beside the path passing toward the 	rear, and increasing detail when Don turned his head to peer at 	something,

	"I 	shouldn't have teased him," Piper said to the donkey. "But 	I thought he should know the rumor."

	"He'll 	survive it," Don said.

	'There's 	something about Rhyme. It's as if she's an older woman pretending to 	be a child. We can't figure out why."

	"I 	wouldn't know," the donkey said. Actually he did know, but 	Cyrus had sworn him to secrecy.

	"So 	if she's not really a child, she can be with him all she wants. We 	just wish we knew why she doesn't act her real age. What is she 	hiding?"

	"I 	wouldn't know," Don repeated. "I'm just an animal."

	She 	reached forward to ruffle one of his ears. "A wonderful 	animal."

	Don's 	circuits heated with pleasure. That surprised Cyrus, He hadn't 	realized that the robot had real feelings. Some of his components 	were more sophisticated than they seemed when collected as junk.

	Cyrus 	tuned out, satisfied that the two were getting along well. He went 	about his business of writing the next play. It was a struggle, as 	always.

	"You 	always make me work for it," he complained to Melete.

	"The 	idea that writing is easy is an illusion," she replied. "Easy 	writing is apt to be junk. You have to bleed on the page, suffering 	for your art."

	"Now 	she tells me," he muttered.

	In 	due course Rhythm showed up. "Rumor has it that you disappear 	from your tent every night, and they wonder where you are," he 	told her. "They have a suspicion that it's with me, and that 	you are a grown woman masquerading as a child."

	"Close 	enough," she agreed. "What else?"

	"Piper 	kissed me."

	"And 	you didn't slap her face?"

	"I 	wouldn't do that!"

	She 	evoked the Decade spell and bit into it. Then she assumed the form 	of Piper.

	"Enough 	with your jealousy!" he snapped. "She's a child."

	"And 	you won't touch a child," she said, reverting to her mature 	self.

	"The 	only one I want to touch is you. I wish youd stop being bleepchy."

	Then 	they both paused as the bad word burned a trail through the air and 	scorched the material of the tent.

	"That 	would have freaked me out, if I hadn't aged," she said. "It 	daunts me. even so."

	"Well. 	I'm sorry. You're like a rose with thorns."

	She 	surprised him by breaking down into tears. "I really am. I'm so 	sorry."

	He 	stared, uncertain what to do. "Comfort her," Melete 	whispered.

	He 	tried. He put his arms around her. "I love you as you are. 	Rhythm, thorns and all."

	"This 	instant conversion—it makes me physically and mentally adult, 	but I lack experience," she said, the tears still flowing. "I 	can do the seductive part, but emotionally I remain somewhat 	childish. Temperamental. You don't deserve this."

	"I 	don't think I deserve you" he 	countered. "You're a Princess and a Sorceress, while I'm only a 	cyborg."

	"You're 	a Playwright," she said. "A good one. You've got fantastic 	imagination."

	"Which 	I carry in my pocket," he said wryly. "Without my personal 	Muse. I am nothing."

	"You 	are everything to me," she said. "Oh, Cyrus, I really do 	love you. I just don't quite know how to handle the unreasonable 	jealousy. I know better, but still it lurks."

	"Maybe 	that .simply takes time and experience.''

	"I 	hope so, I thought that all it took to be adult was stork summoning. 	It isn't, is it?"

	"It 	isn't," he agreed.

	"Hold 	me," she said.

	He 	lay down on the bed with her and held her. Soon she was asleep. 	There had been no stork summoning, yet somehow he was more satisfied 	than if there had been.

	The 	night was still young, and he was not sleepy himself. He loved 	holding Rhythm like this, but his mind wandered. How were Piper and 	Don doing?

	He 	tuned in on them. There was a magic lantern illuminating the camp 	shelter, and Piper was sitting talking with a strange man while Don 	snoozed beside her. Of course Don never truly slept, he just powered 	down for a while. But not everyone knew that.

	"What's 	going on?" Cyrus asked the donkey soundlessly. "She 	shouldn't be sharing a night with a man,"

	"He's 	harmless," Don replied, also soundlessly. "His name is 	John, as in your play, and his talent is creating a local Region of 	Madness."

	"Harmless? 	That's dangerous!"

	"No, 	because it is small, and temporary, and benign. Watch; there's 	another siege starting now."

	Cyrus 	watched through the donkey's eyes. A cylindrical metal can flew into 	view with insect wings. "Hello," the can said. "I am 	your host for this canned show: Can Bee. I can do just about 	anything you can imagine."

	"You 	can?" Piper asked, impressed.

	"I 	am a can, yes," it agreed. "And here is my girlfriend. Can 	D." Another can appeared, filled with sweets. "And my 	clever brother. Can E." This can shone brightly. "And my 	cousin Can L." This one was long and thin, containing water 	with small ships sailing on it. "My military uncle. Can N," 	This can had thick sides. There was a bang, as it fired a Can N Ball 	that flew into the wall and exploded, making a hole. "And my 	incontinent child. Can OP." This little can had a cloth 	covering, and was filled with urine, "He likes nuts." The 	little can tilted, and poured out a stream of urine in which floated 	several corrugated nuts. "Real P Cans," Can Bee said 	proudly, "You are welcome to eat them."

	"Thanks, 	but I have already eaten," Piper said, evidently trying to mask 	an expression of disgust.

	One 	more can appeared. "Sorry I'm late," it said, "Had to 	carry water for the gang."

	"And 	my other son, Can Teen," Can Bee concluded. "Now can we 	get out of here? Let's get canned." All the cans faded from 	view.

	"Harmless 	madness," Cyrus agreed.

	"Unfortunately 	it takes a few days for my effect to wear off," John said 	apologetically. "It is involuntary; I leave a trail of mild 	madness behind me. If you are going where I have been, you will 	encounter it."

	"I 	am traveling that way." Piper said regretfully,

	"Well, 	it's your sanity." John pulled a blanket over his head and 	slept. Evidently once his local madness had manifested, it lay 	fallow for a few hours.

	Piper 	shook her head. "Trees were never like this."

	"Neither 	were machines," Don said.

	Cyrus 	tuned them out. Piper and the donkey seemed to be all 	right.

	Rhythm 	woke with a start. "Oh. I have 	reverted!"

	She 	had, for more than an hour had passed. "Nothing happened," 	 Cyrus reassured her.

	"That's 	good. Or is it?"

	"It's 	good," he said, "You were upset."

	"That 	I remember I was a bad girl, all nasty and jealous."

	"You 	were a good girl, all contrite and gentle."

	She 	gazed at him, knowing better "You're so sweet."

	He 	didn't argue.

	Next 	day Piper and Don came to the state of Miss. Every resident was 	female, single, and fouled up. They had, it seemed, run afoul of 	Miss Adventure, who caused them to have the bad luck to get diverted 	into this territory. When they asked directions to get back on 	track, their informant turned out to be Miss Direct, who gave them 	the wrong information. The one they tried to explain their situation 	to turned out to be Miss Believe, who refused to accept anything 	they said. Then a new woman forgot anything they told her before she 	could help; she turned out to be Miss Remember. Miss Anthrope 	refused to talk to them at all. Miss Place couldn't find anything.

	Finally 	Piper and Don both shut their eyes and forged on blindly, paying no 	attention to any of the women. That was the key; soon they blundered 	out of that region and were back on track.

	Piper 	relaxed by pausing to drink a hot cup of dark liquid. And burst into 	a fit of coughing. She had accidentally taken coughee.

	As 	her vision cleared, she found herself in another section of madness. 	This one had a sign: PARODY puns. She 	quailed, but the only way out was straight through. Thus they passed 	by a bird with fancy tailfeathers: a P-Cock. Another creature 	insisted on peering at them from behind a bush: a P-Ping. Another 	was a nut in the shape of a P: a P-Nut,

	"We've 	got to get out of here," she said, irritated.

	"You're 	getting P-vish," Don said.

	She 	kicked him in the flank.

	Cyrus 	shook his head. He had not meant to send the poor girl into such a 	mess. But she was managing adequately.

	Or 	was she? "Mischief coming up," Don warned him.

	"How 	do you know?"

	"I 	have excellent distance vision. There's a bad sign."

	"A 	bad sign? Since when do you believe in signs?"

	"Stay 	tuned."

	So 	Cyrus did.

	Finally 	they came to a village. "I'm hugely relieved," Piper said. 	"The gruesome puns have worn me out." Dusty had stayed 	largely clear, but he seemed tired too.

	Only 	Don remained as ever, "Sticks and stones will break my bones, 	but puns only disgust me." He reconsidered. "Actually, 	I'll eat the sticks, and my bones are iron. So that part's not 	true."

	Piper 	laughed. "It must be nice, being a robot," she remarked as 	they approached the village sign, "No emotions. You can't get 	upset,"

	"I'm 	learning emotions," Don said, "By studying you, I file 	each one in my data bank for future reference. For example, disgust 	is an emotion."

	"Oh! 	I fear I'm a bad model. Too girlish."

	"No, 	you have obvious emotions. That helps."

	They 	paused at the sign, unwelcome.

	'They 	can't mean that!" Piper said with spot despair.

	Dusty 	compacted to his devil form and peered at the sign, "There's 	small print." he announced. "It says if 	you are uninvited and unexpected, you are also unwelcome."

	"But 	it's too late to find another village!" Piper wailed 	emotionally.

	"So 	we will stay here tonight," Don said. "There must be a 	hostel."

	"We 	already know they're hostile."

	"I 	meant a place to stay."

	They 	walked into the village. From almost every window unfriendly glances 	speared out. The sign by the village hotel said hostile, 	confirming Piper's understanding. That 	wasn't the same.

	Don's 	keen eyes spotted a woman sitting on her porch. She looked nice. 	"Try her," Don suggested, stopping outside that house.

	Piper 	dismounted and approached the woman. "Hello. I'm Piper. We need 	a place to stay tonight." to.'

	The 	woman smiled. "I am Shaunna, You are welcome to stay here. But 	you may not want to."

	"Why 	not?"

	"Because 	I am not popular in this town."

	"The 	town of Unwelcome?"

	"Yes. 	I tend to welcome people. That's contrary to the spirit of the 	village."

	"We'll 	stay here," Piper said.

	"As 	you wish." Shaunna got up and opened her door,

	"What 	about Don Donkey?"

	"I 	have a grass garden in my backyard."

	"Any 	dry wood?" Don asked.

	"You 	talk!" Shaunna said, startled.

	"I'm 	a robot donkey, I have a robot talk box."

	"A 	robot! So then you don't eat grass."

	"I 	bum wood."

	"I 	do have some dry sticks. You are welcome to them."

	"I 	prefer to stay with Piper."

	"You 	can come inside with her. And you also, of course, mister—"

	"Dusty."

	"Yes, 	I'm not surprised. It's a dusty landscape out there."

	"Dusty 	Dust Devil," he clarified, briefly swirling into his other 	shape.

	"Oh!" 	she said, laughing. "That's clever."

	But 	the neighbors were scowling. "She should be burned out," 	one said grimly.

	"Yeah?" 	Dusty demanded, starting to swirl again.

	"Don't 	be concerned," Shaunna said quickly. "They won't do 	anything."

	'They 	won't?" Don asked. "They look pretty determined mean to 	me."

	"My 	talent is the Seldom Scene," she explained. "When I invoke 	it, as I do every night, they can't locate my house." She made 	a gesture. Nothing happened.

	But 	the nasty neighbor seemed to lose his way. He looked all around 	except at the house. Then he departed, disgruntled.

	"I 	don't understand." Piper said. "We are plainly visible."

	"No, 	We can see out, but they can't see in. The scene is gone, for them. 	Even though they know the house is still here, they just can't find 	it. It keeps me safe when I sleep."

	Shaunna 	served Piper and Dusty a nice meal, and brought in her dry sticks 	for Don. "I like this woman," Don remarked privately to 	Cyrus,

	"You're 	really nice," Dusty said.

	Shaunna 	laid her hand on his, "It's nice to be appreciated."

	Cyrus, 	looking through the donkey's eyes, saw how thrilled the dust devil 	was with that touch.

	"I 	have an idea," Piper said. "I am scouting for a play 	troupe. We need villages to watch our plays. I don't think this one 	will be interested."

	"It 	won't be," Shaunna agreed.

	"But 	your talent—it could really help. You see, the stage and 	scenery needs to be set up, and the actors have to get their 	costumes on, without people looking. You could hide them, until 	playtime."

	"It 	would really help," Dusty said eagerly.

	"I 	suppose I could," Shaunna agreed.

	"So 	why don't you come with us? I'll return to the troupe once I get 	enough villages lined up. Then you could travel with us. I know the 	others will like you."

	"But 	you can't do that on your own," Shaunna protested. "Your 	director might not like it."

	Piper 	smiled. "Let's find out. Don?"

	"Bring 	her," Cyrus said immediately, "We can certainly use her 	talent."

	"It's 	okay," Don said,

	"But 	how could you know?" Shaunna asked,

	"I 	am in contact," Don said.

	"He 	is," Piper agreed. "You can come, if you want to."

	"Oh, 	I want to! I don't like living here, but I had nowhere else to go."

	"Then 	it's decided," Piper said.

	In 	the morning they resumed their trek, and Shaunna came along. As they 	left the village, Don looked back. There was a column of smoke. The 	villagers were burning Shaunna's house, now that it wasn't protected 	by the spell.

	"Bleep!" 	Cyrus swore, observing. "I wish I could bum the rest of them 	down."

	Rhythm 	put a hand on his arm. "Don't be childishly vindictive. That's 	my prerogative."

	He 	had to smile. "But it will be good to have Shaunna with us."

	"You 	have a play to write," Melete reminded him.

	So 	he did. Rhythm disappeared, and he sat down at his desk. The play 	was titled "The Riddle," and it concerned Good Magician 	Humfrey and his five and a half wives. He had most of his cast; all 	he lacked was a suitable story.

	Well, 	there would have to be a problem only the Good Magician personally 	could handle. But for some reason he would not be able to handle it. 	Why? What could the Magician of Information not know? That was 	verging on a paradox.

	Cyrus 	laid down his quill and got up. "I need to ponder," he 	said.

	"All 	writers do," Melete agreed.

	Vaguely 	annoyed by her lack of inspiration, he left her on the table and 	left the tent. Maybe a walk around the area would help.

	A 	cloud of smoke formed before him. "We need to blurt," it 	said.

	"To 	what, Metria?" he asked tiredly.

	"Babble, 	blab, blather, ballyhoo, buzz—"

	"Talk?"

	"Whatever," 	she agreed crossly. "You didn't even let me get out of the Bs. 	There's a slew and a half more words to go, like chat, dither—"

	"What's 	your concern, demoness?"

	"That 	part is boring."

	"You 	don't like kissing Tuff?"

	"Oh, 	that was fun for one rehearsal. Making the Witch mad was fun for 	another. But now it's dull. I want to be on my way, stirring up 	mischief elsewhere."

	"Metria, 	we need you for the next play. To play Humfrey's demon wife.' '

	"Dara 	Demoness," she agreed. "I've known her for centuries. I 	can't rile her, she knows all my tricks."

	Cyrus 	sighed. "If you are determined to leave us in the lurch. I 	can't prevent you. But I hope your half .soul gives you half a 	guilty conscience."

	"It 	will," she said. "Buy."

	"That's 	'bye,'' ' he said. But she had already dissipated.

	Cyrus 	stopped himself from smiling, lest she still be watching. He could 	find another actress for the role of Avatar in "The Dream." 	and another for the role of Dara in "The Riddle." 	Meanwhile he was rid of Metria, who was really more trouble than she 	was worth. But it was essential that she not know that, lest she 	change her mind about leaving.

	He 	still lacked a story, so tuned in on Don Donkey as he walked.

	Piper 	was riding, with Shaunna riding behind her. Don was strong enough to 	carry any number of maidens who could fit on his back. It was a fine 	day, and the two were chatting idly as Dusty swirled ahead in his 	whirlwind form.

	Then 	the dust devil returned and formed his devil shape. "There's 	something funny ahead, on a bypath."

	"Funny 	hee-hee or funny odd?" Piper asked.

	"Funny 	odd. It's a demoness crying."

	"Now 	that is odd," 	Shaunna agreed.

	"It's 	 worse than odd," Don said. "It's weird. 	Demons have no souls, therefore no conscience. They don't 	get sad, they get mad.''

	"So 	we'd better investigate," Piper said.

	The 	others didn't argue. They walked on. Dusty leading them to the 	bypath, which was plainly labeled bypath.

	The 	 demoness was there, still sobbing. They came up 	and stopped. The women dismounted.

	"Pardon 	me," Piper said.

	The 	demoness jumped, puffing into foul-smelling smoke. "Oh! You 	startled me," the smoke puffed. "I thought I was alone. I 	come here every day to cry for a few hours."

	"You 	were alone," Piper said. "We came to ask why you are so 	sad. Maybe it's none of our business."

	The 	smoke formed back into a woman. "You're a tree-nymph! What are 	you doing away from your tree?"

	"I'm 	only half dryad," Piper explained. "I'm not bound to a 	tree, though maybe some day I'll adopt one. I am Piper Nymph. My 	mother married a mortal man."

	"You're 	a half-breed!"

	Piper 	bridled. "You have a problem with that?"

	"No. 	not at all. I'm a half-breed myself. I am D Kay, a zombie demoness."

	"Your 	parents—that must have been some romance!"

	"More 	like a disaster in a love spring." Kay looked at Piper. "Do 	you have a problem deciding which heritage to honor? Human or 	dryad?"

	"Yes, 	actually. So I'm out traveling, trying to make up my mind."

	"That's 	my problem. My demon father doesn't want anything to do with 	me, and my zombie mother—well, her mind isn't very good, 	because of too much rot, and she sometimes forgets I exist."

	"So 	you don't know who to associate with," Piper said, "I 	understand perfectly."

	"Yes. 	So I try to fly with the demons, but they leave me behind. So I try 	to settle down in the local zombie 	village, but they don't much tike demons. So I don't know where to 	go."

	"Bring 	her here," Cyrus told Don. "We need a demoness actress."

	"Ask 	her to join the troupe," Don murmured in turn to Piper. "They 	need her."

	"I'm 	with a troupe," Piper said. "We put on plays. In fact I'm 	promised a small part in the next one. They need a demoness. Why 	don't you join?"

	"I'm 	a zombie demoness," 	 Kay reminded hen "I can't do all the things demons do, and I 	tend to stink. I don't think your troupe would want me, though Id 	love to be an actress."

	"We 	want her," Cyrus told Don. Don nodded his head to Piper.

	"We 	can handle the smell," Piper said. "As long as you can 	remember your lines, and have the discipline to keep rehearsing."

	Kay 	broke down in tears again.

	"I 	didn't mean to make you sad," Piper said, alarmed.

	"These 	are tears of happiness," Kay said. "You have given me 	reason to live. That's not something either demons or zombies find 	very often."

	"Then 	come with us," Piper said.

	"Gladly." 	 Kay sobbed, smiling. Several of her teeth were bad, but she looked 	relatively ok.

	Someone 	touched Cyrus's shoulder It was Rhythm. "Is she joining?"

	"You 	used magic!" he exclaimed. "To get a replacement for 	Metria."

	"Well, 	I wanted someone who wouldn't try to seduce you in a play," she 	confessed.

	"No 	zombie demoness will seduce me in a play," he promised. He 	looked around. "Are we alone? Is it safe to kiss you?"

	"It 	is never safe to kiss me," she retorted, kissing him.

	She 	was absolutely correct, unfortunately. Eventually there was bound 	 to be a serious reckoning. But he loved her, regardless.





	Chapter 13: Itinerary


	Piper. 	Dusty, Don, Shaunna, and D Kay went on to the zombie village, "I 	never realized zombies had villages," Piper confided to the 	others,

	"It's 	on the map," Don reminded her. "Zombies can do whatever 	they want."

	Piper 	checked. "So it is. I guess I wasn't paying proper attention."

	They 	went to the center of the village. All around them zombies were 	doing zombie things: smearing rot on vegetables, mold on walls, 	slime on old bread, and scum ,on water Soaking new clothing in acid 	mud to make it deteriorate until a respectable zombie could wear it. 	Coating newly harvested shoes from a shoe tree with stale sweat to 	break them in.

	"Actually, 	zombies are not bad folk," Kay said wistfully. "They're 	always willing to lend a hand, they never give anyone any lip, but 	they do go to pieces on you."

	Just 	so. "Hello," Piper called. "I represent a troupe that 	puts on plays. Would you like to have us stop and do a play here?"

	An 	old zombie man shambled up. "Any zombie actorrz?" he 	asked, spitting out a decayed tooth.

	"Yes. 	One."

	"Okaay." 	He returned to his business of scraping muck onto his porch.

	"One 	presentation site signed up," Don said.

	For 	some reason they did not dawdle at Zombie Village. They walked on 	out and headed for the next village on the map. This was a normal 	human one, they hoped.

	It 	was. But there was a hitch. "Is this a curse fiend play 	troupe?" the Village Elder asked.

	"Not 	exactly," Piper confessed. "It's a new amateur group, 	produced by a curse friend, yet to prove itself."

	"Curse 	what?"

	"Curse 	friend. They're not really fiends."

	He 	nodded. "So you really do have contact with them."

	"Yes." 	Piper wasn't sure whether this was good or bad, for this village,

	"We'll 	try it, not expecting much."

	Don 	marked another presentation site.

	The 	next was a robot village, Rolando. Cyrus was surprised as he looked 	through Don's eyes: all the robots were humanoid, about the size of 	his father Roland, and looking similar. How far did the resemblance 	go?

	This 	time Don did the talking, "You folk look like a robot I know," 	he said. "His name is Roland."

	"We 	know of Roland," they said in chorus, "Our programs 	derived from his. We are all barbarians, and we all love anyone 	named Hannah."

	Cyrus 	shook his head. That program should have been modified. He would 	have to talk to his father when he returned.

	Don 	plowed gamely on. "Do you like romance?"

	"We 	are all very romantic," they agreed,

	"Some 	of our plays have romances."

	"We'll 	watch them!" they chorused,

	Don 	chalked up another site.

	There 	followed several more human villages, all of which were interested. 	Then they came to a village of gnomes. Would they have any interest 	in human plays?

	The 	map said this was gnobody, home 	of the Gnobody Gnomes, They were in Don's data bank, listed as 	largely unknown for some reason. They were a grumpy sort, seldom 	associating with humans, so this was a poor prospect. But they had 	to ask anyway.

	"May 	I talk to your leader?" Piper inquired.

	"We 	have no leader," a lowly gnome replied. He was only about half 	her height.

	"Then 	may I talk to you? I am Piper Nymph."

	The 	little man shrugged. "If you insist. I am Gnonentity Gnome. 	What do you want?"

	"I 	represent a touring troupe. We are putting on plays, and would like 	to have places to present them. Would you be interested?"

	"Why 	would anyone ever want to put on a play herel 	We are strictly a gnothing village of 	gno significance whatever."

	"We 	just would like to have appreciative audiences,"

	"The 	only thing we appreciate is gnotoriety, because we have gnone."

	That 	gave Piper an idea. "Don, ask Cyrus: does he have an actor to 	play the male lead in his next play? The 	one about Magician Humfrey?"

	"A 	gnome!" Cyrus exclaimed. "He would be perfect!" 	Because Magician Humfrey was sort of like a gnome, being small and 	grumpy.

	"Go 	for it," Don told her.

	"Gnonentity, 	how would your villagers like it if one of you played a lead role in 	a play?"

	Now 	the other gnomes gathered around them. "But that would be 	significant," Gnonentity said. "Gno one would ever grant 	us that."

	"We 	would," Piper said, "We need an actor to play the Good 	Magician Humfrey."

	The 	gnomes looked at each other, awed. "Who among us?" 	Gnonentity asked.

	"You, 	if you want. Come with us, and when we loop back to our troupe, you 	will be given the part and have to leam the lines. We'll put on a 	play here, in due course, so all of you can see it's true."

	They 	were amazed, and hardly believing, but decided to find out. And so 	Gnonentity Gnome joined the group,

	"That 	girl is good," Cyrus said, "Not only is she lining up 	villages, she's recruiting actors we need."

	"Just 	don't get hung up on her," Rhythm said.

	"Rhythm—"

	"I 	was joking. Some, You're right: she's a good girl."

	Cyrus 	accepted that. But privately 	he was bothered. Rhythm was getting jealous without reason.

	"I 	know it," she said. "I'm trying to 	do better. Honest I am."

	Bleep 	that mind reading!

	"Bleep," 	she echoed.

	Piper 	completed her circuit of villages, signing up halfway between a fair 	number and a goodly number for play sites. 	Her party rejoined the troupe in good order.

	But 	there was one thing that concerned her. "Cyrus, I avoided a 	section, though it was on the map," she said. "Did I do 	the right thing?"

	This 	surprised him. Maybe he hadn't been watching closely enough, "What 	did you avoid?"

	"The 	section where the Villages became Cities."

	"They 	did that?"

	"Yes. 	Here." She pointed to a region on the map,

	"Necess 	Village?"

	"On 	the map," she said. "But the sign says Necess City. The 	same for the Villages of Adver, Pompos, Elasti and Verbo. They all 	claim to be cities now, though they still look like villages. That 	made me nervous for some reason, and I avoided them."

	"That 	is curious," he agreed, "You did right to be cautious, 	I'll investigate."

	"That's 	good," she said, evidently relieved. "Now you must meet 	the people I collected for parts. Don said you said it was all 	right."

	"By 	all means," he agreed, "You did an excellent job. Piper,"

	She 	blushed. Girls were good at that, "Thank you."

	They 	went outside where the others waited, "Hello," Cyrus said. 	"I am Cyrus Cyboi^g, the Playwright."

	"Gnonentity 	Gnome," the gnome said gruffly.

	"Yes, 	You will play 	the part of the Good Magician. You seem to be perfect for that 	role."

	The 	little man did what seemed to be a rare thing for his 	kind: he smiled. Perhaps he had feared 	that the part would not actually be granted.

	"D 	Kay," the zombie demoness said.

	"And 	you will be Dara Demoness, the Good Magician's first wife,"

	She, 	too, relaxed, reassured,

	"And 	I am Shaunna," the third new person said,

	"We'll 	rehearse with the Seldom Scene," Cyrus said, "It promises 	to be really useful to protect our privacy in different villages. 	Thank you for Joining us."

	"You 	are more than welcome."

	Cyrus 	turned to Piper, "And you will play MareAnn, Humfrey's 	half-wife, the one who likes horses.' '

	Piper 	fainted.

	Fortunately 	Cyrus's cyborg reflexes enabled him to catch her before she fell. 	Had she thought he would not keep his promise?

	"She's 	a good girl," Gnonentity said grudgingly.

	"She 	deserves a good role," Kay agreed.

	After 	a moment and a bit Piper revived. "Thank you," she said 	faintly.

	He 	set her back on her feet. "Go and get a good night's rest. 	Tomorrow we start rehearsals."

	Dazed, 	she departed.

	Curtis 	appeared. "I will see to the accommodations for the new 	actors," he said.

	When 	Cyrus was alone in his tent, he murmured one word. "Rhythm."

	She 	appeared, "Already?" She brought out the Decade spell.

	"Not 	yet. There's something else. Piper discovered that several villages 	have become cities, at least by their signs. That made her nervous, 	and she avoided them. I think she was right to be cautious. Can you 	check this?"

	"Be 	right back," she agreed. She vanished.

	Cyrus 	focused on the play. He had finally gotten it written, with Melete's 	help and prodding, and had distributed copies to the actors. The 	three newest ones would have some catching up to do, but the others 	would help them, and fluffs didn't matter so much in early 	rehearsals. He had done his best, and Melete approved of it, but he 	remained nervous about its reception. It was always thus, when a 	play was fresh.

	"It's 	your artistic temperament," Melete said. "Perfectly 	normal."

	Rhythm 	returned. "This is bad," she said grimly.

	"Name 	changes are bad?"

	'Those 	villages are now in territory controlled by Ragna Roc. He changed 	their names, maybe so he could keep track of his land conquests."

	"Ragna 	Roc," he repeated. "Has he caught on to us?"

	"I 	don't think so. He's just marking his boundaries. I didn't look 	closely; I wanted to be sure nobody saw me. But it shows what we're 	up against."

	"How 	did he take over the villages? Were there battles? I wasn't aware of 	anything like that."

	"No 	signs of violence," she said. "Maybe the villagers just 	decided they liked him better."

	Cyrus 	snorted. "Do you believe that?"

	"No."

	"It 	certainly shows the importance of our mission."

	"Yes."

	"It 	makes it more immediate. Had Piper not been alert, we could have 	scheduled a presentation there. We might have fallen right into the 	power of the enemy."

	"We 	might," she agreed. "Yet the people did not seem 	downtrodden. There's something odd about this. I should check more 	closely."

	"Don't 	go back there!"

	"Cyrus, 	I have to," she said seriously, "I promise I'll be 	careful."

	He 	sighed. "You're growing up. Acting with maturity. I think I 	preferred you carefree."

	"I 	think that's the nicest thing you've said to me." She kissed 	him on the ear and vanished.

	Which 	was the problem with loving a Sorceress.

	He 	focused on last-moment adjustments to the play. Somehow there always 	seemed to be more tinkering to do.

	Rhythm 	returned an hour later. "The people aren't downtrodden." 	she reported. "They're being treated all right. But they are 	nervous. It seems that Ragna Roc's minions identified all villagers 	who might oppose him. and he deleted them."

	"Deleted?"

	"Rendered 	them into illusion. Ghosts, really. There are whole houses of 	illusion. I mean, the house and everyone in it. You can see them, 	but you can't touch them; they aren't really there. They are plainly 	horrified,"

	'The 	ghosts?"

	'The 	ghosts. They know they are illusion, and they can't stand it, 	but they can't do anything about it. I 	think Ragna leaves them there as object lessons to the other 	villagers. If they don't behave, that will be their fate. So of 	course they behave. They are loyal to the big bird."

	"This 	is awful!"

	"Yes 	it is, I'm horrified myself. Oh, Cyrus, we have to stop this!"

	"That's 	our mission," he agreed.

	Then 	she invoked the Decade spell, and let herself cry. He held her and 	comforted her as well as he could. Their relationship seemed to be 	entering a new stage, where other emotions were becoming important, 	not just love or passion. That was probably good.

	Next 	day was the first rehearsal, "We will practice with the Seldom 	Scene," he said. "This will give us privacy, because no 	one will see us until it abates. We don't need it here, but will 	find it useful when we tour, so we want to be sure we have it 	straight. You won't notice any difference, but this whole scene will 	be undetectable to outsiders."

	The 	Witch nodded. "That will help, because we won't always be able 	to set up with complete privacy."

	"Now 	with three new members of the cast, we'll have to allow reading from 	the scripts. But I will expect all of you to know your parts in a 	few days. The prompter will help you throughout. Now take your 	places." They did, and the scene faded out as Shaunna invoked 	her magic. "Announcer, I am your audience, this time. Proceed."

	Crabapple 	stepped up to face him, her back to the unseen stage. Her arms were 	covered; they were not needed for this. She looked like an ordinary, 	attractive woman, with a talent for speaking clearly.

	"It 	is our pleasure to present the play 'The Riddle,' " she said in 	her Announcing voice. 'The opening scene is in the Good Magician's 	Castle, where Hell is breaking loose, figuratively." She smiled 	and stepped out of the way.

	Now 	the scene appeared, as Shaunna turned off her talent. The gnomelike 	Magician Humfrey hobbled onstage, wearing one sock. "Where's 	the other sock?" he demanded grumpily, "I can't bury 	myself in my famous Book of Answers with a sock missing!"

	A 	woman hurried up, carrying a long sock. She was Dusti, with a 	Mundanian hat concealing her little horns. "Here it is, husband 	dear," She handed it to him.

	"About 	time, Sofia Socksorter," he grumped, struggling to put it on. 	He had big feet, which made the process awkward.

	"You'll 	never get it on that way," another woman said. This was Xina, 	her modest garb masking her attributes. It 	had been a struggle to get the prettier actresses to understand that 	there were times when beauty was not the point, "Sit down and 	put your foot up."

	"Stop 	ordering me around. Maiden Taiwan," he grumped as she kneeled 	to slide the sock over his foot.

	"Dinner 	is served," a third woman said. She was Aero Nymph, gorgeously 	costumed and quite pretty.

	"Already?" 	Humfrey grumped. Then he did half a double take. "Rose of 	Roogna—what are you doing here?"

	"Don't 	you remember, dear? I'm your wife."

	"I've 	got five and a half wives. You take monthly turns. Sofia and Taiwan 	are already here." He did the other half of the take. "Both? 	Who is the Designated Wife of the Month?"

	"I 	am," the Witch said. She was heavily veiled, but shapely below.

	He 	peered over his spectacles at hen "You are, Gorgon? Then what 	are these others doing here? There's supposed to be only one wife at 	a time."

	"That's 	the problem," D Kay said. "Something has gone desperately 	wrong."

	"What 	has gone wrong, Dara Demoness?" 	he demanded even more grumpily.

	"Everything," 	 Kay said grimly. She was very good at looking grim. Her costume 	and makeup concealed the fact that she was a zombie, but an 	impression leaked through.

	Piper 	read from her script. "All of Xanth is up in a heaval."

	"That's 	a different story, MareAnn, I can't be bothered with Xanth when my 	five and a half wives don't know their places. Who is responsible 	for this?"

	"We 	don't know," the Goi^on said. "That's part of the 	problem."

	Humfrey 	sighed grumpily. "Then I will just have to research it and find 	out." He tramped offstage.

	Xina, 	as the Maiden Taiwan, shook her head, "He's not going to find 	it in his Book of Answers. It's a recent phenomenon."

	"So 	what are we going to do?" the Witch (Gorgon) asked. "We'll 	never get along with all of us here at once. He's going to get five 	and a half times as grumpy as usual,"

	"We 	shall just have to solve the problem ourselves," Rose (Aero 	Nymph) said.

	"And 	exactly how do we do that?" Sofia (Dusti) demanded. "We're 	not great at solving magical riddles. We're wives."

	"We 	can get outside and survey the situation," Rose said, "Maybe 	we'll be able to make some sense of it,"

	A 	glance circled around the group, Kay (Dara) looked up from her 	script and nodded. "At least it will get us out of the castle 	for a while."

	"We'd 	better tell Humfrey," MareAnn (Piper) said,

	"Why?" 	the Gorgon demanded. "He'll only grump at us."

	Now 	understanding laughter circulated. "We're better off on our 	own," Dara agreed.

	The 	scene ended, "That's good," Cyrus said. "Next time 	we'll work on more feeling. You are all rivals for the Good 	Magician's attention, after all; you will tend to be waspish to each 	other. That's one reason you have to take monthly turns with him."

	"We'll 	make it crackle," the Witch said with relish. "I love a 	mean-spirited role."

	"MareAnn's 	not mean-spirited," Piper protested, "She's a nice 	person."

	'That's 	why she's only half a wife," the Witch said. "Full wives 	are faceted."

	"I 	like this part," Gnonentity said, "Great minds are 	grumpy."

	"We 	could ruin that mood," Dusti said mischievously.

	"I'd 	like to see you try."

	Dusti 	glanced around. "He just invited me, didn't he?"

	"He 	did," the Witch agreed. "Go ahead and ungrump him."

	"It 	was a figure of speech." Gnonentity said, getting nervous.

	Dusti 	dissolved into a whirl of dust. It swiried around the gnome. In a 	moment the woman re-formed, her arms wrapped around him. She kissed 	him on the nose. "Are you still grumpy?"

	"Of 	course," he said.

	She 	kissed him on the cheek. "How about now?"

	"Yes. 	I—"

	She 	kissed him on the mouth. Little hearts swirled around his head. 	"Now?" she inquired with half a hint of malice.

	He 	tried to rally. "You shouldn't be making such a scene."

	"But 	I'm your wife. Magician, 	Your most useful, sock-sorting one. It's part of the play." She 	kissed him again. More hearts swirled.

	Finally 	he kissed her back. "You win, minx."

	"Second 	scene is outside," Cyrus said before the other mischievous 	women could get into the act. They had a new challenge, and soon 	enough one or more of them would be tempting the gnome in bed, 	"While still on stage, of course. Take a break while 	we get the props 	changed."

	The 	rehearsal continued, as the women discovered the weird changes 	occurring in the Xanth of the play. Centaurs were having offspring 	that were either human or equine, not both. Harpies had straight 	bird and straight human children. Chimeras had triplets: lion, goat, 	snake. On the other hand, humans were having crossbreed children, 	such as one with the body of a human and the head of a fish: a 	maidmer. Chaos was developing.

	Soon 	assorted magical creatures were coming to 	the Good Magician for Answers about this chaos. He could no longer 	ignore the crisis. He had to go out and find the origin of the 	problem. The five and a half wives insisted on going with him.

	After 	seeing many weird things, they concluded that the problem was with 	the Demon Xanth, the source of all the magic of Xanth, That magic 	was just from the leakage from his body, a trace amount of his 	power. Decades before, when the Demon had departed on business of 	his own, most of the magic had dissipated, leading to the awful Time 	of No Magic. Later the Demon, on a Demon bet, had assumed the form 	of Nimby, a donkey-headed dragon, and taken up with a mortal girl. 	Chlorine. But that was 	another mere personification, only a tiny fragment of the larger 	Demon. Now the magic remained, but was imperfect,

	'The 	Demon is 	distracted by something," the Good Magician pronounced, "I 	must go and undistract him,"

	"And 	what do we do while you're gone?" the Gorgon demanded. "Pull 	each other's hair out?"

	Humfrey 	glanced at her. Her hair consisted of little writhing snakes framing 	her veil. "That might 	not be a bad idea,"

	For 	a moment her hand went to her veil, as if 	to lift it away 	and stone him with her gaze. Then she thought of a better way to get 	back at him. "We shouldn't stay home 	quarreling. We should go with you, to help you."

	"Hear 	hear!" Rose agreed, "We hate 	being cooped up in the castle with no one to smooch except the moat 	monster." There was a murmur of agreement among the 	Wives; it seemed that the reference was 	not entirely fanciful.

	"Ab.solutely 	not!" Humfrey said grumpily, but perhaps not quite as grumpily 	as in the first scene. For some reason he seemed to have lost his 	edge. Perhaps not all of the smooching had been imposed on the moat 	monster.

	"If 	you go alone, who will tend your socks?" Sofia demanded. He had 	after all married her when his socks got out of hand, as it were.

	That 	made him pause, visibly. Obviously he was incompetent to tend them 	himself.

	"And 	who will keep you properly dressed?" Rose asked. She was the 	one who normally handled that, being very costume conscious.

	"And 	who will protect you from stray monsters?" the Gorgon asked, 	touching her veil again. Normally she stoned any creature who 	threatened him.

	"And 	who will find you a horse to ride?" MareAnn asked. Her talent 	had been to summon equines, until she lost her innocence in Hell, 	but she still got along well with them.

	"And 	who will pop ahead to spy out the route for you?" Dara asked. 	As a demoness she was good at that,

	"And 	who will make your bed?" the Maiden Taiwan asked. She was 	excellent at maid services.

	Humfrey 	realized that he needed them after all, "Then come along if you 	insist," he said grumpily.

	They 	all clustered around him, bestowing kisses wherever they could 	reach, mainly the top of his head,

	"Enough, 	you disreputable wenches," he protested. He seemed to have 	almost run out of grumpiness at the moment.

	That 	completed a scene. "Very good," Cyrus said. "Take a 	break while we get Don costumed for the next scene, Humfrey will 	ride, the Wives will walk, of course."

	"Of 	course," the Wives chorused, amused.

	The 	rehearsals worked out well, and in due course they were ready to 	take the troupe on tour. The new actors fit right in, and Gnonentity 	Gnome had turned out to be ideal for the role. One might possibly 	have suspected that the grumpy gnome almost liked being the constant 	center of attention by six appealing women, even if only onstage.

	They 	skipped Shaunna's unfriendly village and went on to Zombie, where 	Kay had not quite fit in. They used the Seldom Scene to set up, then 	presented it.

	It 	started well. Then Kay, as Dara Demoness, was so nervous she forgot 	her opening line.

	"That's 	the problem," Kadence said, as prompter.

	"It's 	a problem all right," Kay muttered under her breath. "I 	forgot my line." Then she did a double take, "Oh—that 	I5 my line," She faced Magician Humfrey. "That's the 	problem."

	"What 	has gone wrong, Dara Demoness?" 	Humfrey demanded grumpily.

	She 	opened her mouth—and forgot again,

	"Everything," 	Kadence said.

	"Everything," 	she echoed gratefully.

	Then 	it was Piper's turn, as MareAnn, and Kay was able to relax. Not only 	had the audience not realized that she forgot her lines, they had 	not caught on to her identity. Her costume and makeup were so 	thorough, thanks to Guise's magic and the Witch's expertise with 	paints, that she did not look at all like herself.

	Of 	course zombies were not noted for the quality of their observation, 	so maybe it wouldn't have mattered. They did seem to like the play, 	and applauded with much sloughing off of flesh.

	Only 	"The Riddle" was presented here, because Cyrus had wanted 	to see how Kay and the other new actors did before a noncritical 	audience. They stayed three nights, and presented it three times, 	and the zombies liked it better each time as they picked up more of 	its nuances. That also enabled the actors to gain experience and 	competence.

	Next 	on the itinerary was the robot village. Here they presented all 	three plays, "The Curse," 'The Dream," and "The 	Riddle." The robots had trouble seeing the magic auras, but 	related well to Crabapple's pincers, which resembled mechanical 	extremities. They liked the romantic theme, as wild romance was part 	of their programming. They had trouble understanding the second 	play, because robots didn't dream. But the intellectual conclusion 	of the third play thrilled them, as they were good at cold logic. 	They also appreciated the fact that the Good Magician rode a robot 	donkey; for this audience Cyrus had elected not to conceal Don's 	nature.

	Then 	they went to Gnobody Village, All three plays were well received, 	because the gnomes liked the fact that a woman with pincers for 	hands, a sure nonentity, finally won acceptance and love. They also 	liked the way a dragon found true love with a man; if a dragon could 	do it, maybe so could a gnome.

	But 	the major event was the third play. They were rapt the moment 	Gnonentity came onstage as Good Magician Humfrey, They knew him, of 	course, and now they could plainly see the importance of his role. 	 When Humfrey solved the Demon Xanth's problem they 	applauded wildly. Indeed, he had become famous!

	A 	gnomide approached him after the show, Gnomides tended to be quite 	petite and pretty, and this one was typical, "I did not 	properly appreciate you, Gnonentity, before," she said 	dulcetly. "But now that you are famous—"

	"I 	regret my interest is elsewhere. Gneiss," he said.

	The 	others were amazed. He was turning down what promised to be a very 	nice liaison?

	"Oh?" 	she said, surprised, "May I inquire who?"

	He 	fidgeted. "I'm not sure I should say. It's a private matter."

	"I 	think I have the right to know who has preempted me," Gneiss 	said. It was evident that she was not accustomed to being turned 	down.

	"I 	can't say," he repeated.

	Then 	Lady Bug flew to him. She landed and folded her wings. "It is 	time to become open," she said. "I am the one." She 	kissed Gnonentity on the cheek.

	Several 	jaws dropped among the cast. No one had known of this. Lady Bug had 	joined the troupe, hoping to be an actress. She had not yet acquired 	a role, but was a general-purpose substitute, ready to fill in where 	needed. Petite and beautiful, she was utterly unlike the gnome. Yet 	it seemed that opposites had atu^cted.

	"Thank 	you," Gneiss said stonily, and retreated.

	When 	the troupe was alone, the actresses clustered around them. "Why 	didn't you tell us?" the Witch demanded.

	"We 	weren't sure it would work out," Lady Bug said. "But after 	seeing how well the Dragon Lady did in her play, it seemed more 	likely." This time she kissed Gnonentity on the mouth, and 	winged hearts radiated out from them. There was no doubt of their 	mutual devotion.

	"Well, 	we softened him up for her," Dusti said, a bit grumpily,

	Cyrus 	wondered how they would react to the truth about him and Rhythm.

	They 	went on from village to village on the itinerary, and were generally 	well received. The actors became sharper with each repetition, and 	the plays were quite effective.

	But 	the most critical presentation was the last: at the residence of the 	Curse Friends. This made even Curtis nervous. "My whole future 	career as a Producer rests on our pertbrmance there," he said.

	Cyrus 	knew it was true. The Curse Friends knew more about putting on plays 	than anyone else in Xanth. Curtis himself had been invaluable, 	keeping the troupe organized. Without his supervision they would 	have messed it up badly. But what was very good for amateurs might 	be weak for the professionals.

	Soon 	enough they found themselves in the Curse Friends' fabulous palace 	under the water of Lake Ogre-Chobee. They set up in a huge theater 	Could there possibly be an audience to fill this place?

	"Oh, 	yes," Rhythm assured him privately. "I have seen some of 	their plays, when I was a Princess. They take them very seriously."

	"How 	do we compare?"

	"We're 	not in their league," she said. "But they know that Curtis 	is working with amateurs, and will make allowances. We'll just have 	to do our best, and hope for the best,"

	"Actually, 	it is beside the point," he said, "It is a different 	audience we are trying for."

	"Which 	has shown no interest so far," she said. "That worries 	me."

	"The 	whole mission worries me," he said.

	She 	looked around, "Do we dare do anything here? The Curse Friends 	are extremely observant."

	"We 	don't." he agreed. "You must not do any Sorceress magic 	here,"

	"Yes." 	He knew she was as regretful as he was,

	Cyrus 	warned the troupe: "This is apt to be a larger but extremely 	critical audience. Do not expect much applause. Just do your best."

	"Is 	this the end?" the Witch asked. "No more performances 	after this?"

	Cyrus 	smiled reassuringly. "This is the conclusion of the initial 	tour. If we receive the Curse Friends' stamp of approval, that 	should enhance our reputation, and more villages will ask for us. We 	will continue as long as it seems worthwhile." He couldn't say 	that what they were trying for was a far more dangerous audience,

	"That's 	a relief," Crabapple said, "This troupe has become my 	home, I don't ever want to give it up."

	There 	was a general murmur of agreement.

	"You're 	a good group," Cyrus said, touched. "I like being with you 	too. But circumstances could complicate."

	They 	adjourned for what they hoped would be a good night's rest. In the 	morning they would put on all three plays, one after the other, for 	the same critical audience.

	Cyrus 	slept alone, except for Melete. "Will I ever lose you?" he 	asked.

	"Not 	as long as you want me."

	That 	was reassuring, "And what about Rhythm?"

	"Cyrus, 	you know that affair can have no good conclusion."

	He 	sighed. He did know, but refused to admit it.

	Morning 	seemed to come instantly. Abruptly they were in it. The actors, 	perhaps enhanced by nervousness, did beautifully. They were the best 	three performances they had done, with very little Prompting 	required. But applause was restrained; they were not much impressing 	this knowledgeable audience. Cyrus was glad he had warned the 	troupe. Privately he was disappointed, however.

	As 	the curtain closed on the last play, an official came forward. "This 	will do," he said to Curtis.

	Curtis 	fell back into a chair, little stars and planets whirling around his 	head. He had passed!

	The 	official turned to Cyrus. "The material is adequate, but has 	potential. We would like to adapt it for our own purposes, making 	our own productions with our own actors. Is this satisfactory?"

	They 	wanted to steal his plays? Cyrus opened his mouth.

	"Accept," 	Curtis whispered. "It is a sign of honor. We seldom adapt from 	outside sources."

	Cyrus 	stifled his initial reaction, trusting Curtiss judgment. "This 	is satisfactory," he said. "As long as we can continue 	with our own tour."

	"Of 	course." The official walked away.

	"Curtis 	is right," Rhythm murmured. "They go outside their own 	base maybe once in a generation. We have scored."

	Now 	Cyrus checked his mental data bank, and found that it was true. The 	troupe had done very well.

	But 	was it well enough for the real challenge?





	Chapter 14: Andromeda


	Next 	 morning as they were preparing to depart, Curtis approached 	 Cyrus, "This concludes my association with your troupe," 	he said. "It has been a pleasure."

	"You're 	leaving us?" Cyrus said. "Somehow I hadn't realized."

	"This 	was my qualifying examination," Curtis reminded him. "I 	passed, and now can achieve my life's ambition of producing my own 	plays."

	"But 	we need you! You have been invaluable, with your organizational 	expertise. It would be difficult to continue without you."

	"I 	am sure you can manage. You will train in another producer. Time and 	experience will bring expertise."

	Cyrus 	sorted through his memory bank. "But you spent twenty years 	mastering your craft. We can't afford that much time,"

	"Why 	not? A thing worth doing is worth doing well."

	Cyrus 	did a quick calculation. Could he afford to tell the truth about the 	mission? This man had proved to be competent, patient, and reliable. 	He could surely be trusted. "Because this is more than an 	amateur troupe. There is a vital mission."

	The 	curse friend lifted an elegant eyebrow. "Oh?"

	"I 	must ask you to keep a confidence."

	"Granted,"

	"Do 	you know of Ragna Roc?"

	Curtis 	shook his head. "Oh, my. If you plan to associate with that ill 	bird, we must part company immediately."

	"My 	mission is to destroy him."

	"You 	have my complete attention."

	"I 	need to put on plays that will interest the bird enough to summon my 	troupe for a presentation. In that way we can get close enough to do 	what we have to."

	"That 	bird is Magician caliber, and strengthening. You will have to have 	similar power, to have any chance at all."

	"We 	do."

	"Who?"

	"Princess 	Rhythm."

	"She's 	a child."

	"I 	heard that," Rhythm said, appearing.

	"Rhyme! 	You are she?"

	"I 	am the one he needs to smuggle in. Then my sisters will join me to 	tackle the Roc."

	"That 	is why you have been associating with Cyrus?"

	"Yes."

	"Rumor 	had it that—never mind."

	"When 	I associate, as you put it, I am like this." She invoked the 	Decade spell and stood in her full adult splendor.

	"Oh, 	my," Curtis repeated. "I envy you, Cyrus."

	"This 	is why we need you," Cyrus said, "We must be the best that 	we can be, to attract the attention of the Roc without arousing his 	suspicion."

	"I 	appreciate that," the man said, wavering, "Yet—"

	"You 	said you envied Cyrus," Rhythm said. "But you have evinced 	no interest in the actresses, Dusti, Aero—they would have been 	glad to tease you unmercifully, had you ever glanced their way."

	"They 	are not my interest."

	"So 	you do have an interest." Cyrus said, pouncing.

	"Yes. 	But she never gave any indication."

	"Crabappie!" 	Rhythm said, reading his mind. "I'll fetch her."

	"Don't!" 	Curtis said. But she was already gone.

	"She 	is a very nice and beautiful person," Cyrus said. "But any 	semblance of condescension or pity would alienate her. She is 	completely realistic about her condition."

	"She 	is," Curtis agreed. "I appreciate realism."

	Rhythm 	reappeared with Crabapple, who looked amazed. "I had no idea!"

	"I 	have been incognito," Rhythm said. "But this is important. 	Please listen." She turned to Curtis, "Make your case."

	The 	curse friend looked extremely uncomfortable, but made the best of 	it. "I do not wish to embarrass or offend you, Crabapple. I 	find myself attracted to you. These folk wish to persuade me to 	remain with the troupe instead of departing it at this point. If you 	should have any potential interest—" He shrugged.

	"Why 	should you have any such interest in me?" Crabapple asked 	evenly.

	"Apart 	from your beauty and character?"

	She 	almost smiled. "Apart from those."

	"I 	think you would not laugh when I removed my boots."

	"I 	don't think I understand."

	Curtis 	sat down and pulled off a boot. Beneath it was a club foot. It was a 	solid club, capable of doing some damage if swung at anyone. But as 	a foot it was ludicrous. Obviously he needed the boots to preserve 	his balance and mobility, not to mention his pride.

	"Oh, 	Curtis, I didn't know!" Crabapple said.

	"It 	has been my secret." He removed the other boot to expose a 	matching club.

	It 	was almost possible to see the wheels turning in her head, "You 	understand about—limbs, Curtis."

	"Oh, 	yes!"

	"I 	never liked being patronized. But your affinity is legitimate."

	He 	looked at her, "Is there then a prospect for your interest?"

	"There 	is a prospect," she agreed. "Not a guarantee."

	"That 	will suffice," Curtis turned to Cyrus. "I will remain with 	the troupe for the duration."

	"I 	would appreciate a pretext to associate with you," Crabapple 	said, "Without generating unkind rumors."

	"We're 	going to need to train in a new producer," 	Cyrus said.

	'That 	intrigues me," she said. "If—"

	"I 	should be glad to share my expertise," Curtis said.

	Cyrus 	exchanged a glance with Rhythm. It seemed they had a deal.

	Once 	they were clear of the 	Curse Friend's residence, Cyrus called the 	troupe together for a briefing. "We have completed our tour 	successfully," he said. "Now I have in mind a more 	challenging tour Any of you who do not wish to participate will be 	free to leave."

	"We 	know the plays," the Witch said. "What's so challenging?"

	"I 	want to tour territory controlled by Ragna Roc."

	"But 	he might delete us!"

	"For 	what reason? 	We're entertainers."

	Several 	of the troupe members had been at the Good Magicians Castle. They 	understood that Cyrus 	had some sort of special mission. They were nervous, but did not 	protest,

	"It 	is a potential audience," Curtis said, "The curse friends 	are barred from touring there."

	"The 	Roc's people may be hungry for entertainment," the Witch said.

	"Who 	knows," Curtis said. "The big bird might even take notice, 	and summon us for a demand performance." Now that he knew the 	nature of their mission, he was helping.

	The 	other troupe members let it be, though 	obviously not particularly keen on the 	notion. No one decided to leave.

	The 	troupe traveled. Crabapple developed an interest in producing, and 	Curtis graciously started showing her how. The Witch observed that, 	and nodded; she smelled an interesting new 	relationship developing.

	The 	closest Roc-controlled village was Adver City. They reached it in 	two days. They camped at the edge of Roc territory, and Cyrus 	prepared to go in alone to make arrangements, if the residents were 	amenable. The other members of the troupe watched, not comfortable 	about it,

	"You're 	going alone?" Rhythm asked. "Suppose you get deleted?"

	"That's 	why I prefer to go alone," he said. "If I don't return, 	the visit is canceled."

	"Why 	don't you go with him. Rhyme?" Curtis asked. "Then you can 	return to let us know if he gets in trouble."

	"Well, 	I will."

	Again, 	the other troupe members let it be. They knew there was a 	relationship, even if they didn't know its full nature.

	They 	walked to the village. "I've got a bad feeling about this," 	Rhythm said. "Im slightly 	precognitive, when I try to be."

	'Trouble?"

	"Not 	exactly, I just know I won't like it."

	That 	made Cyrus nervous. "I can call this off."

	"No, 	it's necessary. I feel that too."

	That 	did not make him feel easier.

	The 	village looked normal. There were normal-seeming people going about 	normal business. But there was a certain hush about it. For one 	thing, the villagers did not seem friendly. It was as if they were 	antagonistic to strangers.

	They 	came to the center house, normally the residence of the village 	elder "Hello!" Cyrus called, "May we talk?"

	The 	door opened. A woman emerged. Both Cyrus and Rhythm took stock, 	impressed. She was tall and graceful, with huge emerald green eyes, 	blond hair braided to her knees, and a small brown crown. She wore a 	closely fitted dress that flowed out at the bottom, in two layers: 	earthy brown under, lighter grass green outer She had light green 	wings, veined with brown,

	"Hello, 	visitors," she said. "I am Andromeda, Queen of the 	Dragonflies, and appointed elder for Adver City, Who may you be?"

	"Cyrus 	Cyborg, Playwright. This is Rhyme, a member of my troupe. We have 	been touring the area, and wondered whether your village—uh, 	city—would have any interest in viewing our plays."

	"We 	are interested. We have little current commerce with outside 	villages, and life gets dull." She frowned, "The folk here 	are accustomed to adversity, having worked very hard all their 	lives, and do not trust strangers, as you may have noticed. That is 	why I, an outsider, have been appointed by Ragna Roc to handle their 	public relations. But they 	should enjoy your plays, particularly if they contain interpersonal 	stresses."

	"They 	do," Cyrus said,

	"I 	will tell them to attend."

	"Then, 	 with your permission, we will come and present three 	plays, on succeeding evenings."

	"Are 	you married?"

	The 	question caught him completly off guard. "No!"

	"Then 	you will stay with me for the duration of your stay here. We will 	arrange other accommodations for the members of your troupe. Will 	that be satisfactory?"

	Cyrus 	was flustered. "I prefer to remain with my troupe."

	She 	gave him a disconcertingly direct look. "I understood you to 	say that you wish to present your plays here."

	"Yes, 	but I see no need to—"

	Then 	he caught on. "I am not married, but I do have a relationship. 	I would not feel free to spend nights with another woman."

	"Oh? 	And with whom do 	you have this relationship?"

	"I 	do not feel free to say."

	Andromeda 	smiled. "So you are not a stranger to adversity yourself, it 	seems.' '

	"That 	is true," he agreed uneasily.

	"But 	you are free 	to accept my hospitality. I'm sure your significant other will 	understand."

	Cyrus 	looked helplessly at Rhythm, who was completely impassive: a bad 	sign. "I am not at all sure she will."

	"Lovely. 	Well, perhaps I will meet her tomorrow. Tonight you are mine.' '

	Cyrus 	made a difficult decision. "I think we shall have to bypass 	Adver City. It is too contentious a site."

	"The 	troupe wouldn't like that," Rhythm said, "I'll go 	explain." She hurried off.

	"Thank 	you. Rhyme," he said after her 	retreating form, She had decided to go along with the dragonfly 	lady's demand? He really mistrusted this.

	"Bonita!" 	Andromeda called.

	A 	surly-looking village girl appeared. "Yes, Elder?"

	"Tell 	the welcoming committee to make space for a visiting troupe. There 	will be—" She paused, glancing at Cyrus.

	"Twenty." 	he said.

	'Twenty 	in that party."

	"Yes, 	Elder." The girl departed, clearly not pleased with this 	assignment.

	"Now 	please come inside," Andromeda said briskly.

	Cyrus 	entered, helplessly. The inside of the house was painted to resemble 	a forest glade, with tree trunks for walls and flowers around the 	edges. In fact there were flowers and assorted mushrooms throughout. 	They looked completely real.

	He 	bent to touch one, to verify its illusory nature—and 	discovered it was real. 	They were all real,

	"It 	is my talent," Andromeda said. "They grow where I walk."

	Indeed, 	there was a trail of small flowers and mushrooms following her. "I 	am impressed." He sat on a tree stump chair, so as not to step 	on any of the clustered blossoms,

	"Would 	you like anything to eat or drink? I have Hop Scotch that has a 	bounce, Upsc Ale, a higher quality beverage, or one imported from 	the land of the imps. Imp Ale, that goes right through you." 	She looked in her pantree. "There's also gin, but all that's 	left is Vir, and I can no longer drink 	that." She glanced sidelong at him. 	"But perhaps you can?"

	"No!" 	he exclaimed. "I don't want any of those."

	"Please, 	I am trying to be a good hostess in a difficult situation. You 	should try to be a good guest." She looked again, "Ah, I 	do have some tonics. Mono is very consistent, never changing. In 	contrast, there's Tec, that really causes a rumble. There's also the 	friendly effect of Pla Tonic."

	'That 	one will do," he said desperately.

	Amused, 	she poured him a glass, and took one herself. She brought him his, 	then sat opposite him, crossing her legs. They were splendid legs, 	all the way up to the very brink of, but not quite showing under her 	skirt, panties.

	"You 	must consider me to be very forward," she said.

	He 	could not deny it, but didn't want to affront her, "Perhaps."

	"Let 	me show you something."

	'There's 	no need," he said quickly as she lifted a leg.

	But 	all she did was get up and walk to a wall. It was covered by a 	curtain. She drew the curtain aside, revealing a wall-sized glass 	window to her backyard. The yard was filled with trees, flowers, and 	dancing dragonflies.

	"Beloved," 	she murmured.

	A 	singularly bright dragonfly flew close to the window—and 	through it. It formed into a handsome man wearing the garb of a 	king.

	'This 	is Perseus, my husband," she said.

	"Your 	husband!"

	"So 	you see, I too have a significant other. But there are constraints,"

	The 	man stepped toward Cyrus, extending a hand. He wanted to be 	friendly? Cyrus stood and took the hand.

	Their 	hands passed through each other.

	"He 	is illusion," Andromeda said. "As are all my people. I 	alone remain of all the dragonflies." She turned to Perseus. 	"Thank you, dear" She lifted her face to kiss him, and it 	almost looked real, but their lips overlapped a bit. Then the King 	of the Dragonflies returned to his natural form, and flew back 	through the window.

	Cyrus 	went to tap his finger against the glass, verifying that it was 	solid. And thus that Perseus was not.

	He 	turned back to Andromeda—and caught her wiping tears from her 	face. "I apologize," she said, "It's just—not 	easy. I love him so." She drew the curtain back across.

	"Now 	I am really confused," Cyrus said.

	"Understandably. 	Believe me when I say that I would have no interest in you if 	Perseus were solid. Just as you have no interest in me. But if you 	do not wish to share my fate, this is a painful game you must play."

	"Ragna 	Roc!" he said. "He deleted your people."

	"He 	did. We rejected his request that we winged monsters join him in 	taking over the Land of Xanth. He did not take it well, as you can 	see. And if they are ever to be restored, it will be only by dint of 	my effort. I must recruit for him something equivalent in value. 	Then, perhaps, he will deign to give me back my beloved, and perhaps 	also my people. Now you understand the essence of my situation."

	"I 	do," Cyrus agreed, touched. "But I am just a Playwright 	with a Troupe. We put on plays. We're not anything special apart 	from that." He was getting used to that lie, though it still 	made him uneasy.

	"But 	you see. you are special," she insisted. "First, we are 	desperate for entertainment, especially since the curse fiends 	blacklisted us. Second, I suspect the Roc gets bored at times. 	and might well appreciate some plays. If I can 	bring them to him—" She shrugged. "It just possibly 	might be enough."

	"How 	is it that you are here in a human village, uh, city? Instead of 	with the dragonflies?"

	"Not 	by my choice. The roc assigned me here, because among other things I 	have experience governing. I don't like it, and the villagers don't 	like it, but we all understand that if we don't play along, all of 	us will be deleted. So we do what we have to do." She mopped up 	another tear "And I must say, the Roc is not a harsh master All 	he requires is our fealty, and that we do anything he asks. It is 	power he is after, not misery for his subjects,"

	"I 	don't see how you can persuade me or my troupe to welcome being 	deleted, as you put it."

	"You 	won't be deleted if you swear fealty. You may not be deleted if you 	don't; it depends on whether the Roc wants your service. At the 	moment his attention is elsewhere, and we are idle. But I can't 	stand to wait any longer than I have to. to get my King and people 	back."

	Now 	Cyrus really appreciated her position. But it didn't make him want 	to cooperate. "I think I just want to get out of here and hide 	from the Roc."

	"You 	can't hide," she assured him. " I serve him reluctantly, 	but I do serve him, I will send word to him who you are, what you 	do, and where you go. Please don't make me do that."

	He 	was sure she was serious, as he would be if Rhythm got deleted and 	he had to do something to save her. Could he escape the Dragonfly 	Queen by canceling her memory of him? FYobably not, because she now 	had a half slew of related memories, while his talent was strictly 	one spot memory. So what could he do?

	He 	realized that he might not have to do anything, because Rhythm had 	taken advantage of the opportunity to get away and report to the 	troupe, and she was not about to leave him in the arms of a 	glamorous queen. All he had to do was wait, and hope for the best.

	Andromeda 	feted him nicely enough, then took him out to see where the troupe 	was camped. They had made a nice spot in a vacant lot near the 	center of the village, and the tents were pitched there.

	Bonita 	hurried up, "Elder, they wouldn't accept hospitality in our 	houses. They said they insisted on staying together, and that their 	tents were good enough."

	"That 	is true," Cyrus said quickly. He could well understand why the 	troupe members didn't want to get 	separated from each other in strange homes. "We are accustomed 	to doing for ourselves, and averse to being governed by others." 	The inhabitants of this city should really understand that, "All 	we need is space."

	"As 	you wish," Andromeda said.

	Curtis 	spied them and came forward, accompanied by Crabapple in an 	arm-concealing toga, 'This is Curtis Curse Friend, our Producer," 	Cyrus said.

	"Pleased 	to meet you. Elder." Curtis said with studied insincerity.

	"And 	his companion, Crabapple."

	"Charmed, 	I'm sure," Crabapple said, nicely emulating Curtis's tone.

	Then 	the Witch, Dusti, Aero, and Xina came out. "I'm so glad you're 	safe, dear," the Witch said, kissing him on the cheek,

	"I 	can hardly wait to get you back in my bed," Dusti said, kissing 	his other cheek.

	"It's 	hard for me to sleep without you by my side," Aero said, 	kissing his forehead.

	"There 	just isn't any other man like you," Xina said, kissing his 	mouth.

	Cyrus 	was nonplussed, perhaps even nonminused. Why were they coming on to 	him so obviously? Then he saw Rhythm standing in the background. She 	had somehow put them up to it, so that Andromeda would not know his 	real interest. They were cooperating with enthusiasm. It wasn't 	anything personal at this stage; they just liked teasing men.

	Then 	Rhythm's thought came to him, / told 	them to make a pretense of interest in you. They asked "pretense"?

	Just 	so. Because if Andromeda discovered his actual beloved, she might 	report her to the Roc to become a hostage.

	Exactly.

	Andromeda 	was unfazed, "Will you be able to present your first play 	tomorrow?"

	"Yes," 	Cyrus said. "This is our business."

	'Then 	it seems that things are in order. We can now return to my abode."

	And 	Cyrus had to accompany her. Her situation might be desperate, but 	she had effective control over him for the time being.

	As 	evening came, back at the house, Andromeda made her next move. "I 	think that none of those women are yours. They are all actresses,"

	"They 	are," he agreed cautiously.

	"Yet 	you do love somebody, as do I, Understanding that our liaison is 	temporary, why not appreciate it? I have been uncomfortably lonely 	since losing Perseus."

	He 	did not like this. "What are you suggesting?"

	'That 	we night together. I will pretend you are Perseus, though you are 	not the shadow of a man he is, and you may pretend I am your 	anonymous girlfriend, who I think is not the shadow of me. We may 	thus have some pleasure of each other."

	He 	started to protest the derogation of his beloved, but caught 	himself. Andromeda was trying lo make him inadvertently identify 	her. "That is surely the case," he agreed.

	She 	glanced at him, a quarter smile hovering near her mouth. "You 	are not stupid, at least. I like that." She led him to the bed.

	"I 	really am not ready to—" he began.

	She 	lay voluptuously nude against him, her wings folded fiat against her 	back and evidently crush-proof, "Are you sure?"

	"Yes," 	he said uncertainly.

	She 	kissed him. There seemed to be an explosion of mixed hearts and 	flying storks. "Really?"

	"Really," 	he agreed, but it was an obvious lie. This woman was as bad a tease 	as any actress.

	"Lets 	be practical," she said. "We each want something of the 	other. I want to persuade you to swear fealty to the Roc. You want 	something of me, or you would not have come here, knowing the danger 	posed by the Roc. I will accommodate you in any way I can, that does 	not betray my mission. What do you really want?"

	And 	he did want something: to ascertain the limits of the power of Ragna 	Roc, But he couldn't ask that, lest he give away his mission. So he 	temporized: "I fear the Roc, and wish I knew how to stop him, I 	don't want all of Xanth to fall under his sway,"

	She 	shook her head. "Nobody does, Cyrus, But it isn't as if we have 	a choice. The best we can do is cooperate and gain preferential 	treatment for ourselves."

	"Then 	I guess there's nothing I can ask of you."

	"That's 	too bad. Well, let's get down to business." She kissed him 	again, potently.

	Cyrus 	tried to struggle, emotionally, but short of scrambling out of the 	bed and out of her house, he knew there was no way to escape her. 	She was too experienced and too determined.

	"I'm 	not going to swear fealty," he gasped,

	"Not 	even if I do this?" She did something that not even the grown 	Rhythm had done, and it turned him on unbearably.

	"No," 	he said faintly,

	"Or 	this?" She did something else. It was so naughty he could 	hardly imagine it. Any more of this, and 	he was lost.

	"I—" 	he said, unable to field a reasonable protest.

	Then 	something changed. It was dark, so he could not see her face, but 	there was a difference in her manner, "What is going on here, 	Cyrus?" she asked.

	He 	recognized the voice. "Rhythm!"

	"Bleep! 	Quick, make her forget that name!"

	He 	did, striking into Andromeda's memory 	with his talent. She would not forget the episode, but she 	would at least lose the name. "How did you—?"

	"It's 	a talent," she said, "Taking over a body. For a while."

	"You 	know I was trying to resist her," he said. "But she's got 	such a body, and she was using it so well."

	Her 	hands felt his hot body. "So I gather. Well, let's get on with 	it."

	"But 	you—aren't eligible."

	"But 	this body is." She kissed him, and it 	was Rhythm's kiss.

	He 	could resist no more. An internal dam broke, and he clasped her to 	him and kissed 	her passionately. "Oh, anonymous, I love you!"

	"And 	I love you," she said, kissing him back.

	After 	they had severely battered the ellipsis, she 	eased off. "I must leave you. But it 	was fun."

	"It 	was awesome!"

	She 	was gone. He 	felt the change,

	"What 	just happened?" Andromeda asked.

	How 	could he explain it? "You don't know?"

	"Someone 	just took over my body and made wild love to you. It must have been 	your lover."

	She 	had nailed it. "Yes." How angry would she be?

	"So 	that's her talent: occupying the bodies of other women. Does she do 	that often?"

	Did 	Rhythm's changes to age twenty-two count? "I can't exactly 	say."

	"Does 	she ever do this in her own form?"

	"No."

	"That's 	interesting. She must be very ugly."

	She 	was still probing. "Maybe," he agreed.

	"Well, 	she certainly wore me out. Good night." She dropped off to 	sleep.

	Just 	like that! But of course she was a dragonfly; they rested often and 	briefly. Relieved, he relaxed and slept also.

	In 	the morning, she remembered. "That is some girlfriend you have. 	No wonder you're not free to identify her. But you did speak her 	name."

	"Did 	I?"

	"But 	I can't remember it, oddly. I am normally excellent with names."

	"That's 	too bad," he said, relieved on at least two counts: she 	couldn't remember the name, and she seemed not to be angry.

	"You 	may be more of a challenge than I anticipated," she said, 	getting up nude and stretching her arms and wings. She was a 	beautiful specimen. Fortunately she seemed not to be amorous in the 	morning.

	She 	let him rejoin the troupe to organize for the evening play. "But 	you will be with me again tonight," she warned him. "Maybe 	this time I'll identify your mysterious girlfriend."

	He 	certainly hoped not. He stayed studiously away from Rhythm, knowing 	how dangerous it could be if Andromeda ever identified her Rhythm, 	understanding perfectly, cooperated.

	The 	first play, "The Curse," was a success. The villagers 	really were starved for entertainment, and loved it. They applauded 	heartily. Their original unfriendliness faded.

	"That 	actress," Andromeda said that night, "Could she use other 	bodies to come to you because of the awkwardness of her pincers?"

	"Maybe.' 	'

	She 	sighed. "So it's not her."

	Then 	Rhythm took over "No, not her," she agreed with 	Andromeda's mouth. "She's too pretty."

	"Obviously 	you're not," Andromeda replied in her own voice.

	"You're 	talking to each other?" Cyrus asked, amazed.

	"She 	sees I'm not angry, merely intrigued," Andromeda said, "So 	she lets me have some freedom. This way, not only do I get your 	passion, but technically I'm not being unfaithful to my husband. 	That's a fair deal."

	"I'm 	not sure there should be any deal. This is weird."

	"Really?" 	they said together, and tackled him.

	After 	the horrendous ellipsis. Rhythm departed, "I think I like her, 	whoever she is." Andromeda said, "Is she a member of your 	troupe?"

	"I'm 	not telling."

	"So 	she is." The Dragonfly Queen was entirely too apt at reading 	his responses.

	After 	she fell asleep, Cyrus had an awful thought. How old was Rhythm 	physically for these sessions? Was she invoking the Decade spell? Or 	was she really participating as a child? Somehow he hadn't thought 	it through before.

	He 	decided not to ask. After all, as she had said, Andromeda's body was 	adult. It was like the Decade spell in that respect.

	The 	second play, "The Dream," was also well received. And it 	gave Andromeda another idea. "Could she be the dragon!" 	she exclaimed. "That really makes sense."

	Cyrus 	said nothing, hoping she would take it as confirmation.

	"Almost 	too much sense," she concluded. "Why would you reveal it 	in a play, if you wanted the liaison secret?"

	Oh, 	well.

	The 	villagers liked the third play also. "Tomorrow we must let you 	go," Andromeda said regretfully that night. "I can see you 	are not a prospective convert,"

	"You're 	giving up?" Cyrus asked, surprised.

	"Your 	girlfriend will not give you up, or allow you to join the Roc," 	she said. "I can feel it in her nature when she possesses me. 	All I can do is whisper one last private plea." She put her 	mouth to his ear.

	"That's 	not necessary," he said.

	"Get 	out of here, you and your troupe, quickly," she whispered 	urgently. "Lest you suffer our fate. 	You are decent folk. Please don't betray my confidence." Then 	she kissed his ear.

	"Uh—" 	he said.

	She 	drew back, smiling sunnily, "Isn't that persuasive? I am bound 	to do my best to enlist you in our cause."

	She 	was a nice person herself. She had whispered the truth, and the Roc 	would surely delete her if he knew. "You are extremely 	persuasive," he agreed, kissing her, "If it were solely up 	to me, I would do what you say."

	She 	sighed. "Well, I tried." She looked around. "Where is 	your woman?"

	"She 	hasn't come to you?"

	"No. 	I remain myself."

	They 	were in bed together, both bare. "You could have faked it." 	he said. "I might not have realized."

	"I 	wouldn't do that."

	"Oh, 	Andromeda, I think you're a fine woman, and I will help you any way 	I can. But this—"

	"I 	understand. You can't help me."

	" 	I don't think I could resist you. if—"

	"There's 	a peculiar ethic. Let's sleep,"

	"Of 	course," he agreed faintly.

	They 	slept.

	"Cyrus." 	'

	He 	woke, recognizing the voice. "Anonymous!"

	"Sorry 	I was late, I got involved in something. Did I miss anything?"

	"When 	she realized you weren't coming, she let me be."

	"Suddenly 	I like this woman."

	"I 	do too. We have to help her somehow. But I can't swear allegiance to 	the Roc.' '

	"We'll 	think of something."

	"We'll 	think of something," he echoed. But 	he feared there was nothing.





	Chapter 15: Orienta


	In 	the morning the troupe pulled up stakes and moved out 	of Adver City. On the surface it had been 	a successful presentation, and they knew the performances had been 	appreciated by the villagers. But they also knew that the village 	was under the sway of a malign creature the people could not escape. 	That damped down any joy they might have felt.

	Andromeda 	came to bid them parting. "We do appreciate your visit," 	she said. "It was a rare pleasure, and we loved your plays. 	Especially the strife between the good Magician and his bothersome 	wives."

	'Thank 	you," Cyrus said. Then, lowering his 	voice: "Somehow, someday—"

	Andromeda 	shook her head. "There is nothing." Then she transformed 	into a lovely dragonfly and flew away.

	Cyrus 	felt horribly guilty. But she was probably right. Not only was there 	nothing he or anyone else could do, it was dangerous even to mention 	it,

	Curtis 	joined Cyrus as they walked. "I had expected a malign 	atmosphere. Instead I found decent folk under the shadow of 	repression."

	"That 	is the case," 	Cyrus agreed. "What is next on our itinerary?"

	"Necess 	City, governed by a woman named Orienta."

	Cyrus 	quailed, "Why do I suspect I will be nighting at her house?"

	"The 	Roc has set things up to try to welcome and convert visitors. It 	seems persuasion is easier than 	outright conquest. Attractive women are a likely means."

	"Andromeda 	was attractive more than physically," 	Cyrus said. "She's no enemy,"

	"I 	wouldn't know. But I 	suspect it will be no easier in Necess,"

	"That 	is my fear,"

	Curtis 	moved on, and Cyrus saw Crabapple join him. Evidently that 	relationship was working out.

	Then 	Rhythm's mind joined his. / can't get 	over how she let you he when I wasn't there.

	"I 	think Andromeda first saw me as a prospect for conversion, possibly 	saving her people," he murmured subvocally, "But as she 	got to know me, her conscience came into play and she had to warn me 	of the danger. So she sacrificed her hope."

	She 	still could have taken you in bed.

	"Not 	when she started to appreciate me as a person. Sex was one of the 	tools she was willing to use on a stranger, not a potential friend."

	We've 	got to help her, somehow.

	"If 	we destroy the Roc, will his spells dissipate?"

	Not 	according to our information. Most spells survive their makers.

	Which 	left them helpless in that respect. Cyrus felt miserable.

	Me 	too.

	He 	thought of something else. "You might have read her mind to 	learn the Roc's weakness,"

	/ 	tried. She doesn't know it.

	"Maybe 	the next one—Orienta of Necess City—will. If she takes 	me in, and you come to her, maybe 	then you can read her mind,"

	/ 	can try. It will help if you pose the 	question to her. She may not answer you, hut I would still he able 	to read it in her mind.

	Cyrus 	wondered again whether Rhythm had invoked 	the Decade spell before coming to Andromeda, but still hesitated to 	ask.

	/ 	did. I tried to come without it, hut 	the Adult Conspiracy bounced me from her body.

	"You 	tried to cheat!"

	/ 	love you regardless of my age, she 	thought defensively. / want to possess 	you. or whatever it is, as I am now. And remember

	He 	did not ai^ue the case, but was 	glad she had not succeeded in cheating. He loved her, but she was 	after all a child, and he supported the enforcement of the Adult 	Conspiracy,

	/ 	read that!

	Oops.

	Necess 	was a village very like the last. This time Cyrus went in with 	Piper, so as not to seem to favor one messenger over another. She 	rode Don Donkey, with whom she got along well, and her friend Dusty 	tagged along as he usually did, whirling up stray leaves.

	As 	before, the people largely ignored them. They were doing the regular 	village things, harvesting pies and milkweed pods, repairing their 	houses, and the children were playing children's games. But none of 	them seemed to have much enthusiasm; they were merely doing what was 	necessary. It was as if they were under a looming cloud, and Cyrus 	had a fair notion of its nature.

	They 	came to the Elder's house in the center. The door opened as they 	arrived, and a petite winged girl came out. She looked barely older 	than Piper.

	"Hello," 	Cyrus said. "I am Cyrus Cyborg, and this is Piper, and Don, my 	robot Donkey, And Dusty Dust Devil," he added as Dusty 	coalesced to solid form. "We represent a touring troupe. We 	were wondering whether—"

	"Yes, 	the news is around," the girl said, "You played at Adver. 	I am Orienta, appointed Elder of Necess."

	Cyrus's 	data bank whirred. "Daughter of Gloha Goblin-Harpy and Graeboe 	Giant?"

	"Why 	yes! How did you know?"

	"I 	am part machine. I have a memory bank that contains the public 	record."

	"Ah, 	you are another crossbreed!"

	"Yes. 	My father is a robot, my mother a barbarian human. There are many 	crossbreeds in Xanth."

	"I 	am one too," Piper said. "My father is Hiatus Human, and 	my mother is Desiree Dryad."

	Orienta 	smiled. "Welcome to our village. I mean, city. But I have to 	tell you—"

	"That 	this place is under the sway of Ragna Roc," he said. "We 	learned that at Adver."

	"Yes. 	That frightens some folk." She opened the door, "Do come 	in. Your donkey too, if he's housebroken; I love equines,"

	Cyrus 	exchanged half a glance with Piper. "Don doesn't leave poop, 	just ashes." He did not say more about the donkey, preferring 	that his full nature not be known, and Don understood. They followed 	Orienta inside.

	The 	house had an opening in the ceiling, but no stairs. Orienta, being 	winged, didn't need stairs. But above that Cyrus could also see a 	hole in the roof. She evidently liked the freedom of the sky.

	"Let's 	get to know each other before we talk business," Orienta said. 	"I am fourteen, and my talent is to conjure things from the 	East."

	"East 	of where?" Piper asked.

	"East 	of wherever I happen to be. They tend to be artistic and ornate, I 	don't do it much because I can't be sure whether I am stealing them 	from someone who needs them,"

	"I 	am thirteen, and my talent is healing," Piper said. "I 	have a small part in a play: one of the Good Magician's wives."

	"So 	you're an actress!" Orienta exclaimed. "Oh, I envy you!" 	She turned to Dusty. "Are you an actor too?"

	"No, 	just a friend," he said. "We've known each other ever 	since she was one and I was two. I bashed my arm coming out of a 	spin, and she grabbed it and healed it. Or at least made it hurt 	less so it could heal in peace, in time. She didn't mind my being a 	devil."

	"So 	you're my age," Orienta said. "I don't mind either. I 	think your horns are cute."

	The 	two looked at each other. Then both of them blushed.

	"I 	fashioned Don from spare robot parts," Cyrus said, to fill in 	what might have become an awkward silence, "So he's a bit 	clunky, but he understands human talk."

	"May 	I pet him?"

	"Certainly."

	Orienta 	went to pet Don on the shoulder. "Oh! You're warm! And you 	smell wonderfully smoky."

	"He 	bums wood," Cyrus explained. "He has to eat another stick 	or log every so often."

	Orienta 	returned to her chair. She sighed. "I don't think I can 	postpone it any longer. We have to get down to business. That is 	always the case, in Necess City."

	"We 	would like to put on our plays for your villagers," Cyrus said.

	"That, 	too," Orienta agreed.

	"What 	other business did you have in mind?" Cyrus asked, already 	knowing it.

	"To 	convert you to enlisting with Ragna Roc. It's why I'm here. To talk 	any visitors into it, if I can. Especially ones with useful skills, 	such as putting on plays. I really have to try."

	"Why?" 	Piper asked.

	"Because 	my parents are here in Necess City. They found it to be a nice 	village with nice people who didn't mind them being crossbreeds. 	Well, Father isn't, technically; he's really a changebreed."

	"A 	what?"

	"He 	was an invisible giant. Then he fell in love with Mother, who is a 	goblin-harpy crossbreed, and agreed to be transformed to a male 	goblin-harpy so he could be with her. Some folk don't like 	crossbreeds or change-breeds, but here it was okay, so they settled. 	It was nice, until—"

	She 	paused, but no one else spoke.

	"Until 	Ragna Roc came." she resumed after a moment. "He changed 	everything."

	"But 	things look much the same," Cyrus said. "The villagers are 	going about their normal lives, as far as we can tell."

	'They 	have to look that way, or they will be punished," Orienta said. 	"Ragna prefers to take over by persuasion, but if that doesn't 	work, he does it by force. Sometimes there doesn't seem to be much 	difference."

	"But 	there should be all the difference in the world of Xanth," 	Cyrus said.

	"That 	depends." She looked uncomfortable.

	"How 	did he persuade you?" Piper asked.

	"He 	sent his Minions in to give us the word. We all had to swear fealty 	to him, and serve his interests henceforth, or be deleted."

	"Please," 	Piper said. "Tell us the whole story."

	Orienta 	started describing it, and Cyrus found he was able to imagine it as 	if he had been there. Two men marched into the village. They were 	nondescript, but carried themselves with authority, "Gather 	round folk," one called. "We are Damien and Demetrius. We 	have a message from Ragna Roc, the Emperor of Birds."

	The 	people gathered, curious. Orienta's family was among them. "What's 	going on?" Graeboe demanded.

	"You—all 	of you—will hereby swear fealty to the Roc, and serve him 	loyally the rest of your lives, doing whatever he or his appointed 	Minions require of you," Damien said. "Or else."

	This 	presumption annoyed more than one villager, "Or else what?" 	Graeboe asked.

	"Or 	else you will be deleted."

	"I 	don't understand."

	"You 	will cease to exist on this mortal plane. You will become an 	illusion."

	Graeboe 	shook his head. "This is laughable."

	"The 	Roc's first directive is for this village to be renamed Necess City, 	and to provide good housing for us, and appealing women." 	Damien glanced around. "You," he said, beckoning to a 	pretty farmer's daughter named Lita. "Come to me."

	Lita 	looked around uncertainly. She was too young to know what any man 	would want with her.

	"Now," 	the man snapped.

	Lita 	heeded the voice of command and went to him,

	"And 	for Demetrius—" He glanced around again, then fixed on 	Orienta. "You,"

	Orienta 	wasn't sure what this meant, but it seemed that her father did, "My 	daughter is fourteen."

	"Who 	cares? She's pretty. This is the new order."

	"No," 	Graeboe said firmly,

	"You 	are refusing a direct command?" Damien asked, surprised.

	"You 	have no authority to issue any commands," Graeboe said. "And 	certainly none to bother innocent girls,"

	"Then 	we shall have to do it the hard way," Damien said with a 	certain ugly relish, "Ragna will make a demonstration." He 	lifted one hand to the sky.

	In 	half a moment there was a dark blot in the distant sky. It expanded 	rapidly. It was a bird—a big bird. In fact it was a roc. The 	monstrous creature glided down to land behind the two men.

	"This 	family is balky," Damien said, pointing to Graeboe, Gloha, and 	Orienta.

	The 	giant bird's huge glittering eyes fixed on the three of them. Then 	something changed. Orienta felt oddly light. "What happened?" 	she asked her parents. But no sound came out.

	Her 	mother's mouth moved, but again there was no sound. Something was 	definitely wrong.

	Orienta 	ran to her mother, needing her warm comforting embrace. But instead 	of contact there was nothing. She ran 	right through Gloha.

	She 	turned, astonished. How could this have happened? It was as though 	her mother didn't exist—yet there she was.

	Then 	the truth sank in. They had been deleted. They had no material 	substance. They were ghosts,

	"Oh, 	Mother! Father!" Orienta wailed. "This is awful!" But 	all that issued from her mouth was silence.

	The 	three of them turned to look at the other villagers. Another man was 	stepping forward to address the intruders. He was Nathaniel, a 	kindly neighbor. "Now see here," he said boldly. "Those 	men were taking underage girls for nefarious purposes. We had to 	resist."

	Suddenly 	the two minions quailed. The Roc's gaze fixed on them. There was 	Lita standing beside Damien, looking frightened.

	In 	an act of inspiration, Orienta stepped forward and raised her hand. 	She was the other underage girl.

	The 	roc glanced first at Damien, then at Demetrius. Both men's faces 	broke out in horror. Then the Roc glanced at the deleted family, his 	eyes glittering.

	Suddenly 	Orienta felt weight. She was solid again! So were her parents. They 	had been restored.

	"If 	I understand you correctly," Nathaniel said, "you have 	restored the family on the assumption that they will now swear 	fealty to you."

	The 	big bird nodded.

	"And 	deleted the two Minions for exceeding their authority."

	Another 	nod.

	"All 	you want is fealty, not violation of the natural order. The Adult 	Conspiracy holds."

	The 	huge bird shrugged.

	Nathaniel 	glanced back at the other villagers. "The demonstration is 	persuasive. We hereby agree to serve you. Who will you appoint to 	govern us in your name?"

	The 	Roc considered, then slowly lifted one wing to point at Orienta.

	"Me?" 	she asked, unnerved, "But I can't possibly—"

	"She 	agrees," Nathaniel said, with a sharp glance at her. "Orienta 	will be the village elder, and do your will."

	Ragna 	Roc nodded once more. Then he spread his enormous wings and took 	off. Soon he was a mere dot in the distant sky.

	"And 	so it has been since," Orienta said. "The Roc returned us 	to life, and we are grateful. I am doing his will as I understand 	it. I am trying to convert visitors peacefully, so that Necess City 	will be left alone. We are all doing what we have to."

	"What 	happens if you don't convert us?" Piper asked.

	"I 	don't know. Maybe nothing, if the Roc doesn't care about you. But if 	he does—"

	"Deletion," 	Cyrus said.

	"Yes."

	"We 	can't swear fealty," Cyrus said, "Our troupe must remain 	free to travel and present its plays wherever it chooses."

	"Maybe 	it will be all right," Orienta said, a tear squeezing from the 	comer of one eye.

	Cyrus 	wanted to get away from there, but did not want to be obvious about 	it. "You are too young to entertain guests my age."

	"But 	not for our age," Piper said. "Why don't Dusty and Don and 	me stay with you while the troupe is in town? I know Dusty would 	like that."

	Dusty 	blushed.

	"That 	would be nice," Orienta said.

	Piper 	knew that Don could hear and understand everything, and relay it to 	Cyrus. So if they learned another important clue, he would know.

	Cyrus 	stood, "Then I will return to the troupe," he said. "I 	will be in touch."

	"You 	will need to designate a place for the troupe to camp," Piper 	told Orienta, "About twenty people, including a dragon."

	"A 	dragon!"

	"She 	won't eat anyone, I promise."

	"She's 	another actress," Dusty explained,

	Cyrus 	departed. Things were working out reasonably well.

	We 	learned more about the Roc, Rhythm 	thought. Surprisingly fair minded.

	"But 	nevertheless a tyrant," Cyrus murmured as he walked.

	Sure, 	we have to stop him. But now we know him better.

	"He 	doesn't brook any violation of his rules," Cyrus said. "The 	way he deleted his own Minions—that's instructive and scary."

	// 	sure is. Also the way he can delete and 	undelete. That bird's a potent Sorcerer

	Cyrus 	reached the troupe and assembled it for an update. He described what 	he had learned about the conversion of the village. "So we must 	be exceedingly careful what we say and how we act," he 	concluded. "We don't want the give the Roc any reason to come 	here and delete us."

	"We 	understand." Curtis said.

	"We 	do," Crabapple said, taking his hand. That was interesting, 	because of course her hand was a pincer, the man would have snatched 	his hand away if he didn't trust her.

	In 	due course the troupe entered the village and camped at the 	designated spot. The people set about pitching their tents and 	making their evening meal. Several villagers came to watch. They 	were clearly impressed by the way Jim made food for each person. But 	especially by the Dragon Lady, who settled down for a snooze without 	eating anyone.

	That 	night Cyrus tuned in on Don. Piper was teasing Dusty about how he 	liked Orienta, and Orienta was pleasantly embarrassed, "He may 	want to remain here, when the troupe moves on," Don said.

	"Well, 	maybe he can," Cyrus agreed, "He's not a member of the 	cast, and even if he were, we'd let him go if he wanted."

	"But 	he's Piper's friend," Rhythm said,

	"But 	not her boyfriend."

	She 	nodded. "It will be their decision, Orienta's a nice girl,"

	"That's 	the weird thing about these captive villages." he said. "They 	have nice people. We couldn't just destroy them to get rid of the 	roc."

	"We 	couldn't," she agreed. Then she invoked the Decade spell, and 	their dialogue ended.

	The 	first play was a big success. The villagers, uncomfortable about 	becoming isolated, related well to both the curse and Crabapple's 	dilemma.

	After 	the play, Orienta brought her parents up to meet Cyrus. Gloha 	Goblin-Harpy was a petite winged woman of thirty-four, and Graeboe 	was a winged man, with no trace of his former identity as a giant. 	It certainly seemed that they had been happy here until the Roc 	came.

	The 	second play was also well received, perhaps because the 	villagers related to the plight of the 	Dragon Lady, able to love a man only in the dream. The villagers' 	dream was freedom.

	Piper, 	Dusty, and Don continued to visit with Orienta. between 	presentations. The four seemed to be getting along splendidly well. 	"Orienta has company her own age," Rhythm said wisely. 	"She must really have missed that,"

	As 	the audience assembled in the big tent where "The Riddle" 	was to be presented, there was a distant rumble of thunder "Bleep," 	the Witch muttered. "That's Fracto, I know his voice. He's 	found out that folk are having fun,"

	"And 	it's not just parades he wets on," Demoness Kay said. She was 	getting her considerable makeup applied, to mask her zombie 	component,

	"Maybe 	we can finish it before he gets here," Xina said hopefully.

	The 	others just looked at her. But what else was there to do, except to 	hope for the best?

	The 	third play seemed to relate less well, but the villagers plainly 	were enjoying it. Cyrus watched faces as the Good Magician and his 	five and a half wives traveled and finally found the Demon Xanth, 	who was in the form of a donkey-headed dragon. The costume crew had 	done a great job making the Dragon Lady up with a donkey head,

	"Nimby!" 	the Good Magician said. But the dragon ignored him.

	"Demon 	Xanth," Humfrey said.

	The 	Demon still paid him no attention.

	"Let 	me try," Dara Demoness said. She put on a hula-hula dance that 	made the male eyeballs in the audience sweat. But still the Demon 	did not react,

	"Poophead!" 	the Gorgon shouted. That brought the usual laughter from the 	audience. Naturally that would never happen in real life. But this 	was a halfway humorous play.

	Now 	at last the donkey head glanced at them. "Um?"

	"All 	Xanth is going haywire," Humfrey said. "We conclude that 	the magic has diminished to half strength because you are seriously 	distracted. What is your problem?"

	"I 	am distracted," 	the Demon said. "By a riddle. I can't figure it out."

	"Ha!" 	Dara Demoness said. "Humfrey's good at riddles."

	"Not 	necessarily,'' Humfrey grumped.

	"He's 	the Magician of Information," the Maiden Taiwan agreed.

	'That 	has its limits," Humfrey said, obviously ill at ease.

	"He 	knows everything," MareAnn said.

	"Untrue. 	I don't know how to handle five and a half bossy wives."

	"You're 	sweet," Rose said, kissing his eyebrow, which was as low as she 	could reach in her elaborate costume dress,

	"Nobody 	knows how to handle one wife, let alone six," the Demon said.

	"Five 	and a half." MareAnn said. "I'm the half."

	"You 	look whole to me."

	"Half 	a wife. It 	was a small ceremony. I'm a whole woman." She lifted her skirt 	enough to show the barest glimmer of the hint of a panty. That was 	the most the actress. Piper, could afford to flash onstage. The 	audience, unaware of her age, loved it.

	The 	donkey head managed to look slightly confused. "I still haven't 	figured out Chlorine."

	The 	Demon's wife Chlorine came onstage. "I heard that!" she 	snapped. She was portrayed by the Lady Bug, whose folded wing covers 	made a perfect robe. She was beautiful, as her role was supposed to 	be. "What are you doing with all these women?"

	"They 	are my wives," the Good Magician said, "The magical glitch 	in Xanth caused them all to appear at once. It is driving me to 	distraction."

	"You 	poor man," Chlorine said, sympathetically. "Let me fetch 	you a glass of water to calm you down,"

	"No 	thanks!" he said quickly. That brought a laugh: everyone knew 	that Chlorine's talent was poisoning water. "I'm merely here to 	see what I can do to fix the magical disruption,"

	The 	Demon focused an eyeball on the Good Magician. "Then perhaps 	you can help me."

	"He 	will certainly try," Sofia Socksorter said. "He can sort 	out just about anything except socks." That brought another 	laugh.

	"What 	is your riddle?" Humfrey asked. If there was an incongruity 	about the Magician of Information having to ask a question, it 	passed unnoticed,

	"My 	son Nimbus brought it to me. It perplexed him, and now it perplexes 	me."

	"Is 	it about whose hair a barber cuts?" the Gorgon asked. "You 	know, he cuts everyone's hair who doesn't cut his own hair, so does 	he cut his own hair?"

	"Woman, 	get your snaky locks away from here before I cut off their heads!" 	Humfrey snapped.

	"Well, 	it could be that riddle," the Gorgon said as her snakelets 	hissed.

	"It's 	nonsense," Humfrey said. "It belongs to a class of riddles 	that are paradoxical because they are self-referential. None of them 	are worth bothering with." He returned to the Demon. "You 	can see why I am desperate to get things returned to the natural 	order."

	"That 	is no riddle," Nimby agreed with half a smile. The actor, the 	Dragon Lady, had practiced assiduously to craft that degree of a 	smile on the donkey face,

	"So 	what is your riddle?" Humfrey asked again, with a circular 	glare to silence all his wives and also Chlorine.

	"The 	babysitter is tutoring our son Nimbus, and posed it as a riddle for 	him to stretch his mind with. He did not want to admit he couldn't 	solve it, so he brought it to me. Now I don't want to admit I can't 	solve it, and it is distracting me most annoyingly."

	"I'll 	say," Dara agreed. "The only thing a man is supposed to be 	properly distracted by is a panty," She hoisted her skirt to 	flash the male half of the audience. She had extremely well-tilled 	panties, and would have been a seductive terror and a danger to 	herself and all men in the vicinity, had she not been portrayed by a 	zombie. As it was, half the men in the audience freaked anyway, not 	knowing she was a zombie demoness, until she dropped her skirt. They 	really liked this play. The women were for some reason mildly 	annoyed, but did like the notion of the wives running the Good 	Magician's life.

	"Ignore 	Wife Number One," Humfrey said tiredly. "She's got a demon 	hotbox ." That of course brought another laugh, for the naughty 	reference.

	"Ignored," 	Nimby said, shaking the glaze off an eyeball, "The riddle is 	this: why don't two chips of reverse wood nullify each other? Nimbus 	tried putting them together, and they didn't. Yet reverse wood 	reverses anything."

	"I 	have three answers for you," Humfrey said, dramatically 	relieved that it was a simple question that would not require 	research in the Book of Answers. "You may select what pleases 	you."

	There 	was a deafening crack of thunder, followed by instantly heavy rain. 	Fracto had arrived.

	They 	tried to continue, but the wind and thunder drowned out their lines, 	and the water collected in the pockets of the tent, weighing it 	down. The malign cloud wanted nothing less than to bring down the 	tent on their heads. They had to evacuate in a hurry, the play 	unfinished.

	Fortunately 	they were able to extend their tour and finish it the following 	night. Then it was time to move on.

	Cyrus 	talked with Orienta. "You aren't going to urge us to swear 	fealty to the Roc?"

	The 	girl was appalled. "Why would you ever want to do that?"

	"Andromeda, 	at Adver City, tried to persuade us."

	"That's 	hard to believe. She hates the Roc."

	"She 	wants to protect her village." He did not mention how the woman 	had whispered other words, which confirmed the girl's statement.

	Orienta 	nodded, "That's true. She does what she has to, as do we. But 	that didn't work, so I know there's no point. But I will say this: 	those who join voluntarily are treated well, and a number have high 	places in the Roc's forming Empire. You could do well for yourselves 	if you joined him."

	"But 	you aren't urging us?"

	"I 	hope you don't. But I was obliged to tell you."

	'Thank 	you for your candor," he said. "But we will be moving on 	."

	"Please 	don't tell that I didn't try lo convert you. The Roc would be 	furious."

	"I 	will pretend that you tried very hard," Cyrus said. "But 	that I was immovable."

	"Thank 	you. In public of course I have to make the case. But we're alone 	now."

	"Ah." 	That explained her seeming change in attitude. She resembled 	Andromeda in this respect, doing what she had to, but not liking it.

	"Can 	Dusty stay?"

	'That's 	his choice."

	'Thank 	you." Impulsively she kissed him on 	the cheek,

	"You 	are welcome," he said, moved.





	Chapter 16: Layea


	The 	third city was Pompos. After the first two, Cyrus knew better than 	to expect anything similar. They could encounter something entirely 	different.

	That 	turned out to be the case. At first the village looked normal, 	though its buildings were fancier than those of the others, as if 	the occupants were higher class. The people were also better 	dressed, as they went about their assorted businesses. As before, 	they ignored the visitors.

	But 	that wasn't the remarkable thing. There was something distinctly 	different about this normal .scene, Cyrus was appalled when he 	caught on.

	"These 	folk are all deleted!" he said.

	Curtis 	stared. "You're right!" He passed his hand through the 	wall of a house. "It's all illusion."

	"So 	it is," Crabapple agreed, touching the trunk of a tree, and 	passing her shrouded hand right through it. "Even the trees!"

	"Something 	must have truly annoyed the bird," Cyrus said, awed.

	They 	proceeded to the village center. "Hello," Cyrus called. 	"Is anybody home?"

	The 	door opened and an ordinary looking girl emerged. She held up a sign 	printed on a papered tablet: I am layea. 	my talent is to make any man do my bidding, to a degree,

	WELCOME 	TO POMPOS CITY.

	Cyrus 	took stock. "You are illusion?" he asked.

	She 	nodded.

	"And 	you can see and hear me?"

	She 	nodded again.

	"I 	am Cyrus Cyborg, and this is Curtis Curse Friend. We represent a 	traveling troupe that puts on plays for 	village audiences. We were going to ask to make our presentations 	here, but if no one here is real any more, there may be no point."

	Layea 	hastily printed on the next sheet on her tablet, no, 	we are interested.

	"But 	if—" He broke off, as she was already printing.

	WE 	ARE ILLUSION TO YOU, BUT REAL TO 	OURSELVES. WE DESPERATELY CRAVE DIVERSION FROM OUR CRUEL FATE.

	Oh. 	"Of course. I misunderstood. We shall be happy to present our 	plays here. Just designate a suitable spot for us to camp, and we 	will put them on one each evening."

	Layea 	smiled, thank you so much! you may camp 	right here.

	"On 	the street? But that will obstruct your passage." you 	can't obstruct us. we will walk through you.

	Oh, 	again. "Thank you. We will do that." He turned to Curtis. 	"Why don't you see to that, and I will try to learn more about 	the local situation."

	Curtis 	understood perfectly. He nodded and walked away.

	Cyrus 	faced Layea. "I would like to know how it came to this, if you 	care to tell it," Because there was surely a lot to be learned 	about the nature and power of the Roc here.

	I 	WILL be happy to tell you, but you may 	find it unbearably dull.

	"We 	have seen evidence of the Roc's powers and actions in other 	villages," Cyrus said. "But they were not like this. 	Something extraordinary must have happened here."

	She 	nodded, come in. She 	held the door open for him, though of course it had no substance; he 	could simply have walked through it.

	Her 	house was typically organized inside, with nice curtains, a table, 	chairs, and a comfortable couch, i regret 	you can't use the furniture, she printed, 	you will have to make yourself comfortable 	on the floor, that is all that remains real,

	"I 	understand." He felt a chair, verifying that it had no 	substance, and eased himself to the floor. Layea sat on the couch; 	for her it was solid. He remembered how Orienta had said she passed 	right through other illusion people, after being deleted herself; 	maybe stationary objects were different.

	From 	his low vantage, he couldn't help seeing her legs. They were 	ordinary, like the rest of her, but the view under her skirt made 	them intriguing. He looked away, embarrassed.

	But 	then he had to look back, because he had to read her printing. This 	was awkward.

	OH—I'M 	SORRY, she printed, i wasn't thinking. She 	rearranged her legs so that less flesh showed. It seemed she was not 	trying to vamp him in the manner Andromeda had; she just had not 	fully adjusted to the perspective of a visitor on the floor instead 	of on a chair, understandably.

	"Is 	there any way to manipulate your illusion?" he asked. "So 	instead of slow print, you could show me what happened?"

	She 	scribbled: katriana.

	"She 	is someone who can do this?"

	YES. 	SHE CAN REPLAY REAL SCENES VIA ILLUSION.

	"That's 	what we need," he agreed,

	ONE 	MOMENT, PLEASE. She walked out of the house. He remained, getting 	comfortable on the floor. His metal bones made it easier.

	Soon 	Layea returned with another woman. Katriana was older, and 	completely undistinguished. Except when she invoked her talent. She 	lifted her hands, and something appeared between them. It was a 	picture. She spread her hands, and the picture expanded between 	them. It showed the village of Pompos,

	Layea 	held up a sign beside the picture, where 	should we start?

	"At 	the beginning," Cyrus said. "I want to understand the 	whole story."

	THAT 	would be OUR 	HRST PROBLEM, AND OUR FRIEND ETTE.

	"Ette?" 	she's a roc. very PRETTY.

	Roc 	Ette, surely a shapely bird, "Thank you."

	Katriana 	expanded the picture farther, until it was like a picture window 	into the scene. It showed a rock mine. Villagers were busily working 	with picks, hammers, and sieves, extracting small stones from the 	ground. On the hill above the mine was a huge nest occupied by a 	giant but quite lovely bird: Ette, prettiest of roc hens, with 	lovely plumage.

	IT 	IS ette's mine, which we have a deal to 	work, Layea's sign beside the picture 	said. WE trade her things she wants, like 	the latest rckk music.

	The 	scene showed a villager carrying a rock shaped like a musical note 	up to the roc's nest: rock music. Cyrus's memory bank confirmed that 	rocs did like rock music, rock gardens, and rock candy.

	The 	scene showed a close-up of the pebbles the villagers were extracting 	from the mine. They ranged from nondescript to ugly.

	"What 	kind of stone do you mine?" Cyrus asked.

	UGLY 	GEMS.

	"I 	 can see that. But who would want those?"

	The 	picture showed a very pretty young village woman, the kind any 	village man would want to take home. She put an ugly stone on a cord 	and hung the cord around her neck, so that the stone dangled before 	her evocative bosom.

	Suddenly 	the woman was unpretty, and her bosom was repulsive.

	"Oh!" 	Cyrus exclaimed. "Not only is the gem ugly, it makes its wearer 	ugly! But still, who would want it?"

	The 	young woman took off her stone, and became pretty again. Immediately 	a dirty young man approached her. He said something that was 	inaudible to Cyrus, but the girl flushed angrily and walked away. 	The man pursued her, uttering more embarrassing things. It seemed 	that he wanted to do things with her that the girl preferred to 	avoid.

	Finally 	she put the stone back on. The man took one more look at her. shook 	his head in wonder, and departed.

	"Oh," 	Cyrus said. "It made her unattractive, so she was no longer 	bothered by aggressive men."

	YES. 	YOUNG WOMEN FIND OUR UGLY GEMS VERY USEFUL ON OCCASION. SOME WEAR 	THEM ALL THE TIME. EXCEPT AT HOME WITH THEIR HUSBANDS.

	"Got 	it," Cyrus said. "Pompos must have had a prosperous 	business."

	YES. 	IT ENABLED US TO BECOME UNBEARABLY POMPOUS. WE COULD AFFORD THE VERY 	FANCIEST THINGS, AND WE FELT SUPERIOR TO EVERYONE ELSE AND LET THEM 	KNOW IT. THEREIN LAV OUR DOOM.

	"Oh? 	Ragna wanted your mine?"

	NO. 	THE GOBLINS DID. THEY THOUGHT THAT OTHER CREATURES WOULD LIKE THEM 	BETTER IF THE GOBLINS COULD AFFORD FANCY POSSESSIONS. SO THEY 	DECIDED TO TAKE THE MINE FROM US.

	Now 	the scene showed a horde of goblins pouring out of a mountain. They 	oi^anized themselves into a crude army and marched on Pompos.

	The 	villagers saw them coming, and were plainly appalled. This was not a 	warrior village, and they had no way to stop the invasion. What 	could they do?

	Layea 	walked up the hill to talk with Roc Ette, who would also be affected 	by this. Could she help them?

	The 	roc nodded. There was further dialogue, then Layea and several 	village men climbed into a large basket outside of the village. Ette 	flew down and caught its handle in her talons. She lifted it and 	carried them away. Evidently Katriana did not go on this joumey, 	because the scene did not follow it.

	Meanwhile 	the goblin horde was rapidly swarming toward the village. Would the 	special party return in time to stop it? 	The villagers were horrified, knowing that nothing but death, 	rapine, and slavery awaited them if the goblins 	took over. Their prettiest girls were fleeing, because their fate 	would be awful,

	"But 	the ugly stones," Cyrus protested, "Wouldn't they save the 	girls?"

	NOT 	 FROM GOBLINS. GOBLINS OFTEN DON'T FIND 	THEIR OWN WOMEN UGLY ENOUGH.

	Oh, 	again,

	ANYWAY, 	THE LADY GOBLINS WANTED THE STONES TOO, BECAUSE MALE GOBLINS ARE 	VERY AGGRESSIVE. AND THE STONES COULD BE TRADED FOR ALL MANNER OF 	FINE THINGS. THEN THEY COULD BE AS SNOOTY 	AS THE HUMAN 	FOLK HAD BEEN.

	It 	was making ugly sense.

	In 	due course the roc returned with the basket, and barely in time, for 	the goblins were upon the fringe of the village. There was no chance 	to land, so Ette flew over the swarm. The folk in the basket poured 	buckets of water out onto the heads of the goblins, thoroughly 	wetting them.

	The 	effect was immediate. The goblins were enraged, and turned on each 	other, madly attacking. They hated everything, including their 	companions, and laid about them with their weapons,

	"Like 	mundane rabies!" Cyrus exclaimed.

	HATE 	ELIXIR, Layea agreed, opposite to love 	elixir.

	Which 	made the goblins mad, literally. The result was sheer carnage. 	Before long there was nothing left but a pile of brutally slain 	goblins.

	There 	was an awful mess to clean up, but the villagers went to work in 	good spirits. They had to wear protective clothing to avoid being 	touched by any lingering hate elixir, and the growing 	stench was appalling. They persevered, and Ette carried baskets of 	pure water to rinse off the contaminated landscape, and in a few 	days they had the area clean again. Things returned to normal.

	Roc 	Ette had enabled them to save their village and their mine. They 	owed her a huge favor.

	"I 	should think so," Cyrus agreed.

	Time 	passed. Then a stranger appeared. He talked with Layea.

	A 	MINION OF RAGNA ROC.

	Layea 	listened courteously. Then she did something odd. She invited the 	Minion in, fed him a nice dinner, put on a dress that greatly 	enhanced her appearance, and took him to her bed. Her bare body was 	quite enticing, and the man was clearly enticed. So was Cyrus, who 	realized that she looked ordinary only when she wasn't trying. That 	was an inherent talent many women seemed to have.

	"You 	really don't need to show me this," Cyrus said, embarrassed.

	IT 	IS NECESSARY.

	In 	bed, naked, she balked, gently holding him off. There was something 	she wanted in exchange. What was it?

	I 	PROFFERED A DEAL. I WOULD IX) ANYTHING HE WANTED, ALL NIGHT, IF HE 	DID SOMETHING I WANTED NEXT MORNING.

	"Of 	course he wanted something," Cyrus said. "He's a man, and 	you're naked. Men want mainly one thing." He winced internally 	as he said it, remembering how he had learned what it was. "But 	what did you want of him?"

	THAT 	HE DRINK FROM A NEARBY SPRING.

	'That 	seems like an unequal exchange."

	IT 	IS A SPECIAL SPRING.

	The 	man shrugged and agreed. They made the deal. Then he took hold of 	her and stirred up some stork feathers. The Adult Conspiracy came 	into play, fudging out the details, but there was no question what 	was going on.

	Cyrus 	found it voyeuristically interesting despite the lack of detail, and 	was ashamed of himself. Why did she regard it as necessary that he 	witness this private spectacle?

	In 	the morning the Minion, evidently satisfied with the night, 	nevertheless returned to business: his gestures showed that he 	wanted Layea to swear allegiance to Ragna Roc, on behalf 	of the village. Layea still demurred, evidently protesting that she 	couldn't possibly make such an important decision in such a hurry; 	there would have to be a village meeting, discussion, and so on. 	When he became impatient, she kissed him and drew him back to the 	bed. He was nettled, but yielded; she had done well for him in the 	night, and had evidently not yet exhausted his passion.

	When 	a full day had passed, and it was the same time it had been when the 	Minion arrived, her attitude shifted. She begged him to accompany 	her to a special place not far outside the village. It was a small 	spring, with a warning sign beside it: beware—lethe.

	The 	Minion read the sign, and gesticulated. He wasn't touching that! But 	Layea insisted, pointing to the spring, reminding him that he had 	agreed to do it. He had, indeed, and finally, reluctantly, he lay 	down beside it, put his mouth down, and drank.

	Then 	he got up, evidently dazed. Layea was gone and he was alone. He 	wandered away, remembering nothing. The village had been saved.

	"But 	how—?" Cyrus asked, bewildered, "He saw the sign. He 	knew it 	would wipe out his memory."

	MY 	TALENT. I CAN MAKE ANY MAN IX) MY WILL TWENTY-THREE MINUTES OUT OF 	TWENTY-FOUR HOURS. SO I KEPT HIM WITH ME TH.AT TIME, THEN ASKED HIM 	TO DRINK. I MUST ASK, NOT COMMAND, AND IT HAS TO BE WITHIN HIS 	CONSCIENCE. BUT HE HAD AGREED, 	AND IT WAS NOT CONTRARY TO HIS CONSCIENCE. SO MY TALENT WAS ABLE TO 	MAKE HIM DO IT, A DEAL IS A DEAL.

	Cyrus 	worked it out. She had to know a man twenty-four hours before her 	talent became effective on him. So she had done what she had to, 	keeping him with her, doing whatever it took, until she could invoke 	her talent. Then she wiped him out.

	"This 	is ugly," he said.

	Layea 	nodded, i had to tell you, even if it 	makes you hate me.

	"I 	don't hate you! I'm just—appalled." what 	else could I do?

	He 	pondered. He had seen the other two villages. The Minions of the Roc 	were merciless. She had a weapon, and she used it. "Nothing," 	he said.

	She 	looked relieved. She had not wanted to alienate him, but she had had 	a cruel choice to make. Submission to Ragna, or a desperate use of 	her power. She had done what she had done, to save her village.

	"Yet 	my opinion isn't worth much," Cyrus said. "You could 	have simply told me you distracted the 	Minion, without showing me exactly how. That would have saved you 	some embarrassment."

	I 	FEEL GUILT, AND NEED A LIVING OPINION, THE VILLAGERS OF COURSE 	SUPPORT ME, BUT YOU ARE MORE OBJECTIVE. I WANT TO KNOW THAT I DID 	THE RIGHT THING, EVEN IF I HAD TO DO A WRONG THING TO ACHIEVE IT.

	So 	it was a confession. He wished he could do the same about his own 	guilt with Rhythm.

	A 	bulb flashed over his head, "I have a similar confession, 	requiring similar objective judgment," he said. "Will you 	listen?"

	Layea 	gazed at him, half in surprise, half in gratitude, yes.

	"I 	was seduced by a Sorceress, a stunning creature twenty-two years 	old, I love her still. But her real age is twelve. She used magic to 	age herself a decade, and I knew it, but did it anyway. How great is 	my guilt?"

	YOU 	ARE A MAN.

	"Yes. 	But that doesn't excuse it."

	MEN 	don't need EXCUSES. 	THEY DO WHAT THEY DO REGARDLESS. YOU COULDN'T HELP YOURSELF.

	"Still."

	THE 	GUILT IS THAT OF THE SORCERESS, WHO KNEW WHAT SHE WAS DOING.

	"I 	don't blame her! I love her."

	YOU 	ARE A MAN, she repeated, the minion was a 	man. all a woman has to ix) is show

	HER 	panties or HER 	BRA OR EVEN SOMETIMES JUST HER BARE FLESH AND SHE CAN DO ANYTHING 	WITH HIM SHE WANTS. SHE USED YOU AS I USED THE MINION. YOU ARE 	GUILTY ONLY OF BEING WHAT YOU ARE.

	"Somehow 	I'm not relieved."

	AT 	LEAST YOU LOVE HER. THE MINION DIDN'T LOVE ME; HE USED ME. YOUR 	GUILT IS MINIMAL.

	He 	hadn't thought of it that way. A burden was easing from his 	conscience. "Thank you, Layea."

	WELCOME. 	Then they resumed the illusion presentation.

	A 	 month later a second Minion arrived, they 	 had found the first, who had

	FORGOTTEN 	HIS MISSION. HE DEMANDED TO KNOW WHO HAD DONE IT.

	"But 	they couldn't know it was you," Cyrus said. "Because of 	the forgetting."

	THEY 	 KNEW WHERE HE HAD BEEN SENT.

	The 	second Minion was a canny brute. He wanted Layea to swear fealty, 	but he also wanted whatever the first had gotten. so 	I TOLD HIM. IN FACT KATRIANA SHOWED HIM.

	"Showed 	him! The way she's showing me?"

	YES.

	"But 	then she must have been there, to see it herself!"

	NO. 	I TOLD HER, AND SHE RE-CREATED THE SEQUENCE.

	Cyrus 	shook his head. This was desperation indeed. There were women who 	would literally die rather than expose themselves to the potential 	humiliation of having their illicit seductions publicized.

	The 	picture showed a picture within the picture, as the Second Minion 	watched what the first had done with Layea, The sight evidently 	excited him greatly.

	WE 	MADE A DEAL. HE COULD DO THE SAME AT NIGHT. IN THE MORNING I WOULD 	FILL TWO CUPS WITH WATER. ONE WOULD BE NORMAL; THE OTHER, LETHE. HE 	WOULD CHOOSE, AND WE BOTH WOULD DRINK.

	"He 	agreed to that?" Cyrus asked incredulously.

	THE 	ILLUSION SHOW MUST HAVE TURNED HIM ON.

	As 	it had turned Cyrus on. It was, as she had said, the condition of 	being male.

	So 	the Second Minion had at her all night, and in the morning she fixed 	two clear drinks. She held them up before him, inviting him to 	choose.

	He 	picked one, then gestured: he wanted her to drink first. She put 	hers to her mouth and sipped. She smiled, not losing her memory.

	Ha, 	He took her drink from her, and gave her his.

	"Hey!" 	Cyrus said. "Isn't that cheating? You should have drunk 	simultaneously."

	I 	 CHEATED TOO.

	"How? 	You gave him his choice."

	WATCH.

	Layea 	was clearly reluctant to drink from the second cup. but he insisted. 	She evidently reminded him that he must 	drink too, and her talent was making him conform, so they drank 	together. One sip each.

	Layea 	looked slightly confused, affected by a little bit of memory loss. 	The Minion smiled, then glugged down the rest of his drink, while 	Layea sipped more delicately.

	Then 	he stood dazed. He had forgotten everything. She turned him about 	and sent him walking out of the house and village. He was done.

	"But 	he switched drinks!" Cyrus protested. "You had the lethe!"

	I 	 FAKED CONFUSION.

	"But 	if that wasn't the one—you drank from both."

	I 	FILLED EACH HALF FULL OF LETHE, AND HALF FULL OF SAFE WATER. THE 	LETHE IS THICKER, AND SETTLED TO THE BOTTOM.

	"And 	you never drank down to the bottom, as he did! You tricked him."

	I 	DID, WAS I WRONG?

	Cyrus 	considered. The iVIinion had been so determined to cheat that he had 	fooled himself. He had thought he had the safe one, and glugged it. 	"Less wrong than he was."

	THANK 	 YOU. I DO FEEL SOME GUILT.

	"Ragna 	Roc must have been pretty mad when he lost a second Minion."

	HE 	didn't NOTICE.

	"Didn't 	notice! Then why did he destroy your village?"

	Layea 	smiled. The illusion picture moved again.

	This 	time it showed Roc Ette gracefully flying. When she nested on the 	ground her plumage was drab brown, but when her wings spread they 	displayed rainbow colors. She was beautiful when she tried, 	typically female in that respect.

	One 	day as she foraged she encountered a male roc. He admired her wings 	and squawked to her in bird talk. He wanted her to come with him, to 	be his companion and perhaps more. She was interested, and followed 	him to his lair, which was beside a huge castle being constructed 	from rock candy.

	Then 	she saw three other roc hens nesting, and realized that she had not 	been invited to be his sole companion, but a member of a harem. 	Revolted, she wheeled about in midair and departed.

	The 	three other hens vaulted from their nests and pursued her. They 	boxed her in, flying before, above, and 	below her. "Halt, hen!" the one above squawked. "Do 	you not know who asked you? Don't be coy." There was no actual 	sounds in the picture, but Layea printed the words so that the full 	scene was re-created.

	"Whoever 	he is, he has some nerve," Ette retorted. "You may be 	satisfied to share, but I am not. We do not practice plural marriage 	in Xanth ."

	"That's 	the old order. He is Ragna Roc, establishing the new order. You 	would do well to seek his favor, as we do."

	"Why 	should I want the favor of a philandering cock bird?"

	"Because 	otherwise he will delete you."

	"What 	me?"

	"Delete 	you. He will render you into illusion. That's his talent. He is a 	Magician Roc, and he will govern, or see the end of Xanth in a 	mighty battle. He is a god."

	"He's 	deluded! There are no gods."

	'There 	were no 	gods," the hen squawked. "Now there is Ragna. Join him 	now, while the position remains open."

	"Hardly," 	Ette said with contempt. Then she folded her wings and plummeted 	past the lower hen. She got a new direction and flew away before the 	three could reorient. She dodged behind a mountain, turned at right 	angles, and shot off again, flying barely over the ground, losing 	them.

	But 	after that her life was not her own. When she foraged, there were 	spy rocs that reported her position, and the three hens came after 	her. It was evident that Ragna intended to capture her for his 	harem, regardless of her preference. What was she to do? She had to 	forage, lest she starve, but then she could be spotted in the sky. 	Rocs are big birds; they can not readily disappear in flight.

	It 	got worse. Ette made evasive maneuvers whenever she spied another 	roc, be it hen or cock, but even so they were narrowing down her 	home range. Soon they would locate her nest, and then she would be 	doomed.

	Then 	the villagers repaid their debt to her. They constructed a tent over 	the deepest section of the mine, coloring it to resemble that 	section so that it would be invisible from above. It was big enough 	for Ette to roost under. They also masked her nest, so there was no 	indication that a roc had ever roosted there.

	But 	how was she to eat? They handled that too. They brought her a 	constant stream of assorted foods to eat, ranging from trapped welsh 	rabbits to giant pot pies harvested from the 	village orchard. It wasn't pleasant having to stay hunched down all 	day, but she was essentially invisible, and safe.

	Days 	passed, and the search died down. Ette emerged, desperate to resume 	hunting for herself.

	And 	the rocs spied her. They had been waiting in ambush, knowing she was 	somewhere in this sector. Now they had narrowed it down further.

	She 	tried to escape, but they had her surrounded. She fled to the very 	edge of Xanth, but could go no farther, because without the magic 	ambiance she could not fly at all. She had to land and await her 	fate.

	Ragna 	came. "Swear allegiance to me," he squawked.

	"Never!" 	she .squawked back.

	He 	didn't argue. He merely looked at her—and she felt something 	strange in her wings. She tried to lurch into the air, to fly—and 	discovered that her wingfeathers had become illusion. Ragna had 	clipped her wings, in his fashion. She could no longer fly.

	They 	strung a harness around her, made a captive centaur flick her to be 	light, and the three roc hens used the harness to carry her up and 	on to Ragna's castle. She could not fly away, and was doomed to 	belong to his harem until she could slowly grow new flight feathers. 	If he didn't delete them too,

	"What 	a fate," Cyrus said sadly.

	Then 	the Minions backtracked, and located the concealed roost in the 	mine. They understood what the villagers had done.

	Ragna 	came and stared at the village. One by one the houses were deleted, 	along with whatever was inside them, including people. Those who 	tried to flee were deleted in midmotion. The Roc did not stop until 	the entire village and all its inhabitants were illusion. Then they 	set a sign saying pompos city and 	departed, leaving it as an object lesson for anyone else who might 	think to oppose the Roc.

	NOW 	YOU KNOW, Layea concluded.

	"I'm 	sorry," Cyrus said, feeling inadequate.

	NOT 	YOUR FAULT.

	"Thank 	you for showing me what happened here,"

	WHY 	DID YOU WANT TO KNOW?

	Cyrus 	pondered, and decided to take a risk, because he really wanted to 	give Layea and her village some hope. "I 	have a secret." Both women smiled, we 	will keep it.

	"My 	mission is to destroy Ragna Roc. I am gathering information." 	Both women looked highly gratified, we 	wish you success, is there any way we can

	HELP?

	"Do 	you know the limits of his power?"

	They 	shook their heads, it seems to have no 	limit, he is surely the most powerful sorcerer in xanth.

	"Thank 	you," he said regretfully.

	Cyrus 	did not return directly to the troupe. Disturbed by what he had 	learned and the magnitude of the mission, he walked out of the 	illusion city until he came to a region where the trees and objects 	were real.

	Something 	attracted him to a particular tree. There was a sadness here, a 	loneliness. In fact it felt like a maiden weeping. Grief was 	something he had a fresh appreciation for. But he saw nothing. Yet 	it was here, beside the tree. Was it another virtual ghost?

	No, 	human man. the lady's thought came 	faintly. It is I, Anona.

	He 	looked around again, "Anona, I don't see you."

	Look 	down.

	He 	looked down. All he saw was an ant.

	Yet. 	Anona Ant. I am sadly lost from my Pique ant hill, and fear I will 	never find my way home.

	"An 	ant! How can I hear you?"

	Lift 	me up near your head.

	He 	reached down and put out one finger for the ant to climb on. She 	did. Then he brought the finger to his face. Anona was a 	surprisingly pretty ant. "You can read minds?"

	It's 	a complicated story. The essence is that Che Centaur fed me some 	royal jelly, two years ago, and it made me more female than is good 	for me, and had a side effect of making me slightly telepathic.

	He 	spoke aloud, because that focused his thoughts specifically so she 	could read them. "That explains that. But how did you get 	lost?"

	/ 	 was foraging alone—my 	 untoward femaleness makes me unwelcome among other 	workers—and 	found a nice grain of wax on a snoozing bird. But when I pried it 	loose, the bird woke and took flight, and carried me away I finally 	got off when the bird landed, but I was far far away from home. I 	have been crying ever since. Can you help me?

	"I 	don't know. I am not conversant with ant geography."

	/ 	believe we are guided, sometimes in 	ways we don't understand. There must have been reason for me to get 	lost, and for you to find me. Let me nest in your pocket, and 	perhaps you will find a way to return me to my hill."

	Cyrus 	was about to demur, but the grief of Anona ant threatened to burst 	out again. So he tried reason. "I am on a very dangerous 	mission. It would not be safe for you stay with me for any length of 	time."

	Does 	it relate to Ragna Roc?

	"How 	did you know that?"

	Because 	you are here at the edge of the village he recently destroyed. It is 	also uppermost in your mind.

	"Yes. 	Then you know the danger."

	Help 	me, and I will help you, if I can. I doubt an ant can do much, but 	there must have been some higher purpose in our meeting.

	Cyrus 	sighed. He put the ant in his front shirt pocket.

	Ah, 	you have some cookie crumbs here I can eat.

	"I 	guess I do." he agreed. "Sometimes I store them there." 	He turned around and walked back to the troupe. He never thought of 	Anona again, and she didn't remind him, though she was close enough 	to reach him telepathically. Maybe it was her notion of manifest 	destiny.

	They 	put on the plays, staying three days. The illusion villagers loved 	them all. They might have no substance, but their human passions 	remained.

	THANK 	YOU FOR TAKING THE TROUBLE, Layea printed. YOU ARE 	THE HRST REAL FOLK TO TREAT US LIKE 	PEOPLE.

	"You're 	welcome," Cyrus said, a lump in his throat. The village had 	helped a friend, and paid a horrible price.

	"Maybe 	we'll visit again, when we have more plays," Kadence said.

	Cyrus 	had caught the troupe up with the general history of the village, 	and they all sympathized. There were nods of agreement. They would 	return—if they had the chance.





	Chapter 17: Lullaby


	"We 	have two cities to choose from," Curtis said. "The left 	fork of the trail leads to Elasti; the right fork to Verbo, Do we 	have a preference?"

	"Elasti 	City and Verbo City," Cyrus repeated thoughtfully. "I am 	growing tired of the big bird's penchant for puns."

	"Actually, 	Elasti has been named that all along," Curtis said. "Perhaps 	it served as the inspiration for the Roc's renaming of the others,"

	"Let's 	go there, then," Cyrus 	said.

	Elasti 	City turned out to be a wonder of rubber and elastic, with buildings 	that swayed in the wind and snapped back into shape as it passed. 	The people, too, seemed resilient, being friendly and not illusory. 	They were not bent out of shape by the appearance of outsiders.

	"This 	is beautiful," Rhythm said, looking around.

	"Mind-stretching," 	Kadence said, giggling.

	But 	Cyrus knew that there was danger here, as in all the 	areas taken over by Ragna Roc. What 	special challenge would they encounter?

	The 	central building was especially interesting, looking partly like a 	limber palace and partly like a lady's garment that flexed 	gracefully with every suggestion of a breeze, "I could almost 	wear that, when I mature," Rhythm remarked.

	"In 	what venue?" For she was both princess and girl.

	"Both, 	of course." She was probably correct.

	"Hello!" 	Cyrus called.

	The 	laced door opened and a woman appeared. She was elegantly garbed in 	a dress that stretched in all the right places, and she wore a 	petite elastic crown. "Yes?" she inquired, her 	voice wonderfully resilient.

	"I 	am Cyrus Cyborg, and these are Rhyme and her sister Kadence," 	Cyrus said. He never liked lying, but there was no alternative in 	this case. "We represent a traveling troupe. We would like to 	present three plays here, if you are interested,"

	The 	woman nodded. "I am Princess Lullaby of Elasti City, and we 	have been expecting you. Do come in."

	"Expecting 	us?" Cyrus asked, nonplussed.

	"Did 	you suppose your travels were secret? We have considerable candor to 	share. Enter."

	"Thank 	you. Princess," Cyrus said, hardly nonminused by her words. 	What did she mean by candor?

	Lullaby 	seated them on ornate bouncy stools, and sat in a thronelike chair 	herself. It gave springily under her weight. Everything here was 	resilient to some degree.

	"You 	will want to know about our association with Ragna Roc," 	Lullaby said. "That is simply told. We have always had a fine 	business in the export of elastic clothing and materials; it helps 	stretch our budget so that our people don't get bent out of shape by 	hard work."

	"So 	we have seen," Cyrus agreed cautiously.

	There 	was a boom!, the sound of a nearby explosion, making them jump. 	"Don't be concerned." Lullaby said soothingly. "That's 	only Rocky, helping with construction. His talent is to make stones 	or other small things explode. It's very handy when we have to clear 	a cluttered lot."

	"You 	are still doing construction?"

	"Oh, 	yes. We like building new things. We posted a sign saying block 	long erection."

	Cyrus 	bit his tongue. Rhythm looked slightly suspicious, and Kadence 	noticed nothing. Had Lullaby said it on purpose? What was she up 	to?

	"It's 	good to keep working,'' Cyrus said noncommittally.

	"Then 	Ragna came and offered us more. Working with him, we are in a 	position to extend our range and expand our influence. Naturally 	this interested us, and we gladly joined his realm."

	"Realm?"

	"He 	is a god, Cyrus. He doesn't have a kingdom but a realm."

	This 	was too much for Cyrus. "He's a rank impostor!"

	"You 	will surely change your opinion, once you know more of him. We did."

	"He's 	a power-hungry birdbrain!"

	She 	nodded benignly. "I see you will need some persuasion. I think 	it is merely a matter of discovering your price."

	"I 	have no price! I am loyal to the present order."

	"Really?" 	Lullaby opened her gown to show the curvy upper lines of a jeweled 	bra.

	"That 	won't work," he said, disgusted.

	"So 	it seems. The actresses of your troupe all got into bed with you and 	tried to seduce you, without success. That might indicate sterling 	reserve."

	"Might." 	Cyrus agreed, shaken by her knowledge of that particular situation.

	"Or 	it might suggest disinterest in their bodies," Lullaby 	continued resiliently. "Because then you took up with a child,"

	He 	stared at her. So did Rhythm and Kadence.

	"A 	twelve-year-old girl. You seem to be having a regular affair with 	her Now you are getting interested in her six-year-old sister,"

	"I—" 	Cyrus said, but further words clogged in his throat.

	Rhythm 	put her hand on his, "She's baiting you," she murmured.

	Kadence 	put her hand on his other hand. "Don't let her get to you."

	"But 	this is outrageous!"

	Both 	hands squeezed his wamingly, and he shut his mouth.

	"Cyrus," 	Lullaby continued inexorably. "You are a pedophile,"

	The 	hands continued their warning squeezing. The girls evidently knew 	something he didn't. He kept silent.

	"Consensual, 	it seems," Lullaby said. "Interesting."

	Then 	he realized: the woman knew only part of the story. She had made an 	assumption that might have been reasonable, based on her incomplete 	information, and was playing him for her own purpose. It was better 	to leave her in ignorance.

	That 	gave him command of the situation. "My relationship with these 	two girls is consensual," he agreed, "What are you leading 	up to?"

	"Swear 	fealty to Ragna Roc, assist him in ushering in the new order, and 	not only will you be among the privileged, 	you will be free to maintain any relationships you want, with any 	amenable children, not merely these two."

	She 	was trying to blackmail him into enlisting! Now maybe he could play 	her, for vital information. "I doubt it. Ragna deleted two 	Minions for trying to take over two underage girls,"

	"He 	did delete them, but not for that reason. Ragna does not care about 	interpersonal relations, apart from those directly with him: loyal, 	unquestioning obedience to his will, expressed or implied. He 	deleted them because they exceeded their authority. They could have 	had those girls, had they cleared it with Ragna in advance. Instead, 	they presumed. Ragna has little tolerance for presumption."

	'They 	didn't ask," Cyrus said, appreciating the distinction.

	"They 	lost track of their place," Lullaby agreed. "A smart and 	loyal Minion never does that."

	"You 	are such a minion," Cyrus said.

	"Indeed, 	and you are free to leave it uncapitalized as long as you are not 	one yourself. Are you now amenable to joining the new order?"

	"No."

	"You 	are honest and direct. That's good, Ragna needs officials of that 	description."

	"No. 	I am not honest and direct, I am concealing the nature of my devious 	relationship with these girls."

	"As 	you have to, in the present order. Let's move on. We have been aware 	of your mission and movements throughout. We did not expect the 	other city elders to recruit you. If I do not succeed, I will 	forward you to one who will."

	"What 	do you think my mission is?"

	'To 	destroy Ragna Roc."

	"How 	can you know that?"

	"Because 	your mission started with the Good Magician. He is laboring to find 	a way to stop Ragna's advance without danger to himself. So he made 	this your Service to him. That's the way he works. Thereafter we 	have tracked you via the spy we have in your midst."

	Cyrus 	had thought he was recovering ground, but this dropped it from under 	him again. "A spy?"

	Lullaby 	laughed. "So you see, nothing has been secret. The Roc has seen 	you coming throughout. At first he sent a 	curse after you, but that seems to have gotten lost."

	"There 	was a curse," Cyrus agreed. "But our producer is a Curse 	Friend, and he defused it. It wasn't very effective anyway. I 	understand it was a used one."

	"That 	was common cents."

	He 	was startled again. "What?"

	She 	brought out several small copper coins. "Hold these. They 	facilitate reasoning." She handed them to him.

	He 	looked at them. They were completely ordinary mundane pennies, dull 	and worn. Common cents.

	"It 	made cents to use a used spell," Cyrus said. "Not only was 	it cheaper, it couldn't be traced to its source. If it worked, good 	enough; if not, little was lost."

	"You 	see, common cents helped you work it out."

	"It 	wasn't directed at me, but at the greatest danger to Ragna," 	Cyrus continued. "Evidently I'm not it."

	"Evidently." 	she agreed, taking back the pennies. Now it was clear why she was so 	logical; she had the cents. "I have little belief in the 	efficacy of mindless curses. I expect to do a better job."

	"Regardless, 	I am not signing up with Ragna," Cyrus said.

	"You 	can't escape him. You are not an Escape Pea."

	"A 	what?"

	She 	brought out a small pod. "These. Consider them." She 	handed the pod to him.

	It 	popped open as he took it, and the peas rolled out. He tried to grab 	them, but they cleverly avoided his hand and spilled onto the floor. 	Rhythm and Kadence tried to catch them, but they danced around and 	got away,

	"Escape 	Peas," Cyrus said. "You are right; I'm not clever at 	escapes the way they are."

	"It's 	their talent. Every person has his talent, I like Dale's."

	"Who?"

	"Dale. 	He's one of our citizens. His talent is to knock the socks off 	people. You can tell when he's annoyed, because everyone in the 	neighborhood is barefooted, or at least sockless."

	"She's 	teasing us," Rhythm said tightly.

	"She 	should try it on the Good Magician," Kadence tittered. "He 	has more socks than anyone."

	"I 	think it is time for us to go," Cyrus said.

	"By 	no means," Lullaby said. "You must stay the night, all of 	you. In the morning I will give you a tour of the city, beginning 	with our hy- draponics pool."

	This 	was a word not in his data bank. "What kind of pool?"

	"Hydraponics. 	We grow hydras from nothing but water," Lullaby explained. 	"Some have seven heads, others nine heads. They are really 	quite impressive."

	That 	did it. Cyrus stood to go. "We are not interested."

	Lullaby 	shrugged. "Sleep on it, and we'll discuss it further in the 	morning.' '

	"I 	have no intention of—" He broke off, for she was doing 	something odd. She was making a sound, like a sustained note, or a 	croon. In fact, she was singing.

	Then 	he became aware of the slackening grips on his two hands. He looked, 	and discovered that both Rhythm and Kadence had fallen asleep beside 	him,

	"I 	am named for my talent," Lullaby explained. "I sing people 	to sleep. Now carry them to the bed, so they can rest comfortably. 	This way." She stood and walked to a doorway.

	There 	seemed to be little else to do except what she asked. He couldn't 	carry both girls at once, and couldn't leave them alone in this 	house. He had to stay with them. He stood, bent to pick up Rhythm, 	and carried her in the direction Lullaby was going. This turned out 	to be a fancy bedroom with a huge soft bed. He laid the girl down on 	it, hoping she would be all right. She slept throughout; the 	enchantment was strong. Then he went back and picked up Kadence, and 	laid her beside Rhythm.

	"That's 	good," Lullaby said. "They have a knight light." So 	it seemed; it was in the shape of a glowing mounted knight.

	"What 	are you trying to do?" Cyrus demanded.

	She 	smiled. "You are such a handsome man. You must have a fans 	club."

	Cyrus 	drew yet another blank. "A what?"

	"To 	beat off obsessed fans."

	Oh. 	"No,"

	"Now 	you may if you wish join me in my bed, or sleep here."

	"I 	am not joining you."

	"Just 	verifying." She resumed her singing.

	"I 	won't—"

	When 	he woke, it was morning. He was lying beside the two girls, who were 	now stirring.

	"What 	happened?" Rhythm asked,

	"Her 	talent is to sing folk to sleep. She put us down for the night."

	"That's 	all?"

	"All 	I know of. I slept too. She was demonstrating her power,"

	"Let's 	get out of here."

	"If 	she lets us."

	"Make 	her forget," she murmured.

	Good 	idea. They walked out the doorway, and into the main part of the 	palace.

	Lullaby 	intercepted them. "Ah, you are up. It is time for breakfast." 	She gestured to a set table. "I have blue bread and gray V. But 	watch the Mugs; they will steal from you if you aren't careful. You 	don't want to get Mugged."

	"No 	thanks," Cyrus said, refusing to ask about the food, "We're 	returning to the troupe."

	"Not 	yet." She started to sing,

	Cyrus 	made her forget her intent. By the time she remembered, the three of 	them were back on the street and walking rapidly away from the 	castle,

	"Well 	done," Rhythm murmured, "I didn't want to show my power,"

	"Don't 	even speak of it," he murmured back, "Their spy might be 	near."

	You're 	right, she thought. Who 	is that spy? She doesn't know. She gets her information from a 	little bird.

	A 	little bird! He had to smile. But he knew she meant it literally, 	and it did make sense: Ragna was after all a bird. A big bird, but a 	bird. He would have bird allies.

	"Who 	could be the spy?" Kadence echoed, evidently receiving the 	thought too, "Nobody in the troupe would betray us."

	"That's 	my impression," Cyrus said,

	"Mine 	too," Rhythm said.

	They 	continued to mull it over, mostly silently, as they walked. They 	were sure that none of the regular troupe 	members would do it. But what about the peripheral ones? And there 	they zeroed in on a possibility. Dusty! 	Rhythm thought.

	Dusty 	had associated with Piper, and with his big sister Dusti. They would 	have shared troupe gossip with him. And that was Lullaby's 	information: troupe gossip. Most troupe members did not know or even 	suspect Rhythm's identity. Or that she used the Decade spell to age 	herself for an hour at a time. Or that Kadence was their daughter. 	So the real secrets had been maintained. That was good.

	Dusti 	and Piper would not have realized that Dusty was a spy; they were 	innocent. But why would Dusty join the Roc?

	Oriental 	Rhythm thought. The 	Roc must have promised him a nice girlfriend—and 	delivered.

	And 	there it was. They had solved that riddle.

	What 	were they to do about it? Nothing, Cyrus concluded. Just continue 	their secrecy about the things that mattered, Ragna had little 	reason to fear Cyrus or the troupe, but excellent reason to fear 	Princess Rhythm.

	Meanwhile 	the Roc wants to win you oven Rhythm 	thought. Are you tempted?

	The 	Roc thought Cyrus was a pedophile! No, he wasn't tempted,

	/ 	was only teasing. But 	she was angry too, and so was Kadence. They would have to live with 	that suspicion, not refuting it, until this mission was done, one 	way or another.

	But 	don't turn him down flatly. Rhythm 	advised. Let him think you are 	considering it. Maybe you'll learn more.

	Good 	point.

	The 	troupe had moved into the village and set up in the vacant lot 	provided. It seemed that a villager had come to tell them that the 	Elder approved the presentations, and Cyrus and the girls were being 	entertained at the palace.

	"I 	was concerned," Curtis said when they rejoined the troupe. 	"It's not like you not to inform me."

	"She 	put us to sleep with her magic lullaby," Rhythm said. "We 	had no chance."

	"She 	called me a pedophile," Cyrus muttered.

	Curtis 	knew much of the truth. He tried with reasonable success to stifle 	his laughter.

	"She 	said he could have us both, openly, if he joined the new order," 	Kadence said. Theoretically she was too young to know what a 	pedophile was, but this was a special situation.

	"And 	that there's a secret spy in our midst," Rhythm said.

	"A 	what?" Curtis asked, startled.

	"Who 	provides information about the troupe."

	'There 	is none," Curtis said with certainty. 	"I know these folk. None of them 	would do that."

	Cyrus 	took him aside and whispered their conclusion. The Curse Friend 	nodded and departed, shaking his head.

	That 	evening they put on the first 	play. It was well received.

	After 	the play. Lullaby approached Cyrus. "You 	may have until 	your stay here ends, to reconsider the 	offer," she said.

	"And 	if I still decline?"

	"Ragna 	will decide. Probably he will let you go. He 	can't trust involuntary Minions, But it's 	a good offer."

	"I'll 	think about it,"

	"Very 	good." She moved on.

	That 	night Rhythm joined him, but was hesitant, "Considering what 	Lullaby thinks, I don't know whether to—you know."

	Whether 	to invoke the Decade spell. Surely there were ways for Lullaby to 	know what happened here, and if she learned that Cyrus was not a 	pedophile she would realize that she had 	no real hold 	over him,

	"Let's 	just be innocently together," he said.

	Will 	you settle for that? she asked 	mentally,

	"Of 	course. I love you regardless."

	But 	you're a man.

	" 	I am," he agreed.

	Men 	care only about one thing. Even children know that.

	"Not 	everything children know is true."

	You 	keep surprising me, she thought, 	snuggling close.

	"We'd 	 better talk aloud or sleep, lest some 	realize" that you can read my 	mind, he finished 	as a thought for her to read.

	"So 	what is on your mind, Cyrus?" she asked.

	"Two 	things. One is trying to figure out the weaknesses of Ragna Roc."

	"We 	haven't found any."

	"The 	other is what the prophetic riddle means: Two to the Fifth."

	"We 	are the Two."

	"And 	maybe the Roc is the Fifth. And we're going to him. But that's just 	asking to be deleted when we don't join him. That's no good."

	I 	can't say this aloud: that I am a 	Sorceress who will enchant him. "No 	good," she agreed aloud.

	Suppose 	he is immune to your Sorcery? "So 	there must be something else, because the Good Magician doesn't 	speak nonsense."

	I’ll 	bring in my sisters. Actually that's 	the plan: to get the three of us together. Nothing can stand against 	our cubed power "What else could 	there be?"

	Ragna 	knows of the three of you. He must have something in mind. "I 	have no idea."

	Deletion. 	If he catches us. "Surely 	something bad."

	"Horrible."

	"Awful," 	she agreed, snuggling closer.

	They 	slept, innocently. It was wonderful.

	In 	the morning they went to see Lullaby. The plan was for Cyrus to ask 	leading questions, and for Rhythm to read the answers in the woman's 	mind, perhaps gaining some clues.

	"Why 	hello, Cyrus and Rhyme," Lullaby said as they stood by her 	door. "Do come in."

	Inside, 	comfortably settled, Cyrus got blunt. "You tell me that Ragna 	Roc wants my fealty. I have difficulty understanding why he should 	want me."

	"You 	are a cyborg—the first we know of in Xanth. You thus can 	relate to both the human and the robot species. That could be 	useful."

	"How 	could he be sure my fealty was good? That I wasn't lying, to get 	close to him and somehow hurt him?"

	"You 	are a cyborg," she repeated. "You have machine components. 	An iron skeleton, a data bank, a crossbreed outlook."

	"I 	do."

	"Machines 	can't lie. They have to be true to their 	programming."

	"But 	I can lie. I'm half human."

	"But 	only for good reason. Such as to protect yourself from condemnation 	for violating the Adult Conspiracy. If you make an oath, you will 	honor it.'

	She 	had him there. 	"Still, I might somehow annoy Ragna, and then he would delete 	me. Why should I rislt that?"

	"Apart 	from free access to your child love? A fine residence? Power over 	others, in the name of the Roc?"

	"Apart 	from those," he agreed.

	"Because 	your risk of deletion 	is much less if you are with Ragna, than 	if you are against him."

	"Is 	it really? I am wary."

	"I 	can give an example. There was a man here in this city who annoyed 	Ragna by trying to steal food reserved for a favored Minion, Ragna 	deleted him. But the man had a useful talent, 	so after a 	few days Ragna undeleted him. Then the man annoyed him again, being 	unreformed. This time Ragna banished him. So he was spared, and now 	he lives elsewhere, we care not where. Ragna is cautious and not 	vindictive. Maybe some day he will need that man's talent again,"

	"How 	does Ragna delete something?"

	"He 	merely peers at it and exerts his power,"

	Cyrus's 	mind made a connection. "He has to see something to delete it."

	"Why 	yes, I suppose he does," Lullaby agreed. "Does it matter?"

	Cyrus 	reconsidered. "Maybe not. When he deleted Pompos City, he did 	it building by building, and that included everything inside the 	buildings. So there were things he didn't directly see, but they 	were still in range."

	"Maybe 	the deletion proceeds from the outside 	in," she agreed, evidently intrigued.

	"Could 	he delete himself?"

	"Maybe 	with a mirror?"

	"Probably 	the mirror would be deleted," Rhythm said, smiling.

	"But 	if he could delete himself—could he then undelete himself?" 	Cyrus asked.

	Lullaby 	shrugged. "I wouldn't know. It is academic, because he has no 	reason to delete himself."

	"I 	suppose not," Cyrus agreed, "Unless he got captured and 	imprisoned."

	"He 	would delete the prison and walk out," Lullaby said.

	That 	gave Cyrus another idea, "Is there anything he can't 	delete?"

	"I 	doubt it. As you noted in Pompos, he deleted everything."

	"So 	he did," Cyrus agreed, "Well, thank you. We'll put on the 	second play tonight. I hope you enjoy it."

	"I'm 	sure I will."

	They 	departed, returning to the troupe. Cyrus wondered whether Rhythm had 	gotten any useful information from the woman's mind.

	I 	did. She didn't like the sharpness of 	your questions. She truly serves the Roc, and hates any indication 	of weakness in him. His having to he within sight of something to 	delete it or undelete it is a limitation. But there's more.

	Are 	you teasing me?

	No. 	You really scored with the question about what the Roc can't delete. 	There is something. 	But she doesn't know what it is.

	That 	was really interesting. The bird had to see it, and something still 	couldn't be deleted.

	We 	need to find out what that is, he 	thought.

	Yes 	we do.

	There 	it lapsed. But they had made significant progress.

	The 	folk of Elasti City really enjoyed the second play, with its 	stretching the nature of reality and romance. They applauded 	heartily. They certainly didn't seem to be oppressed; they liked 	being under Ragna Roc's wing.

	The 	third day Cyrus walked around the beautiful city, openly admiring 	the architecture. But his mind was on the twin mysteries: what could 	Ragna Roc not delete, and what did Two to the Fifth mean? Were they 	related?

	Two 	had to be himself and Rhythm. The Fifth must be the Roc. But why the 	Fifth, and not the Fourth or the Third? What about the intervening 	numbers? It just wasn't making any sense.

	Lullaby 	approached him, "I will expect your answer after the conclusion 	of your third play."

	"I 	may not be able to give it."

	"You 	will give it. If you are not for Ragna, we shall have to assume you 	are against him."

	"That 	seems fair." Because Cyrus already knew he would never sign up 	with the big bird.

	The 	audience was right with the play. The actors were impassioned, 	knowing that a crisis point was approaching. Were the folk of Elasti 	City going to let them depart next day in peace'.' What would happen 	if they didn't?

	Lullaby 	is planniiif; something, Rhythm 	thought. / don't know what, hut she had 	definitely made some sort of decision.

	That 	did not ease Cyrus's concern. But all he could do was see it 	through.

	The 	play proceeded to the point at which Nimby, the Demon Xanth, posed 	the riddle for the Good Magician Humfrey: why didn't two chips of 	reverse wood nullify each other'.'

	"I 	have three answers for you," Humfrey said. "You may select 	what pleases you."

	"I 	will," the donkey-headed dragon said.

	"First, 	it is indeed a member of that nonsensical class I mentioned before, 	so should not be taken seriously."

	"Nevertheless, 	I am taking it seriously."

	Just 	so. "Second, the two chips are part of the larger reverse wood 	tree that fragmented eons ago, so don't affect each other any more 	than two hands on a person cancel each other; they are part of the 	same whole, and act together, even if somewhat separated 	physically,"

	"But 	if they do affect each other, what then'.'"

	'Then, 	third, they would each reverse the other, causing it to enhance 	rather than reverse, and it would enhance the reversal ability. So 	instead of losing reversal, they would reverse other things twice as 	strongly. So there is no conflict and no paradox."

	The 	donkey head angled thoughtfully. "It seems so simple when you 	clarify it,"

	"That's 	my business," Humfrey said, looking gnomishly smug.

	'That 	resolves my dilemma. Thank you." The Demon Xanth faded out. 	That was a spot effect of the Seldom Scene, impressive onstage.

	The 	Good Magician looked around. Suddenly five wives also faded, leaving 	only MareAnn, the half wife. "Let's go home, dear," she 	said, leaning down toward him. "We haven't had a moment alone 	together since the Demon got distracted. We have a lot of thwarted 	love to make up .' "

	"Don't 	try to kiss me!" Humfrey grumped.

	But 	she tackled him, dropped him to the floor, and planted a huge 	slobbery kiss on his face as the scene faded. The audience roared, 	loving the gnome's obvious embarrassment.

	After 	the curtain calls, Lullaby approached Cyrus. "Have you come to 	a decision?"

	This 	was the crunch. What did she have in mind? He would simply have to 	bring it on.

	"Yes. 	I don't want to swear fealty to Ragna Roc ."

	She 	nodded. "I suspected as much. You have been steadfast in that 	respect. Ragna respects that. Therefore he wants to meet you ."

	"I 	prefer to remain with my troupe." He had to have Rhythm along, 	and not for personal reasons; she was the key to the defeat of the 	Roc.

	"Of 	course. Therefore Ragna is extending an invitation for your troupe 	to bring your plays for performance at Castle Rock Candy, his 	official residence."

	"An 	invitation!" Cyrus did not have to pretend astonishment. Just 	like that, they were to reach the big bird?

	"A 	word of caution. Such invitations, however politely phrased, are not 	subject to refusal. Your only option is to accept with gratitude."

	"But 	none of us have agreed to swear fealty!" he protested. "We 	are not his allies."

	She 	nodded again, "Two things about that. First, Ragna does receive 	visitors who are not his disciples. It is a matter of governance. As 	an entertainment troupe, you may perform for him and go your way 	thereafter. Second, if he truly desires your fealty, you and the 	members of your troupe will be subject to persuasion by Ragna's 	Minions. So you may not remain separate."

	"I 	don't like the sound of that. I don't want 	my actors pressured. Certainly I don't want Rhyme and Kadence held 	hostage against my enlistment."

	She 	shook her head. "No, no, no! That would be duress, and would 	not lead to ultimate loyalty. There will be nothing of that sort. 	The only problem for you might be if some of the members of your 	troupe were persuaded, and you were not. That might lead to 	dissension in your ranks."

	Why 	was she playing this so cautiously? "So maybe it would be 	better not to go."

	Suddenly 	she is afraid, Rhythm's thought came.

	"Cyrus, 	please. If you decline, not only will you bring the Roc's ire upon 	yourself and your troupe, you will bring it on me for not persuading 	you. I assure you that the invitation is good, and that you will be 	subject to no coercion or unpleasantness, only reasonable 	persuasion. He can be a most congenial host, when he tries, and he 	has a great deal to offer. Only if you try to attack Ragna or his 	subjects will there be repercussions. I beg you, accept."

	She's 	sincere.

	Cyrus 	was oddly moved. He had merely been playing a role, that of a wary 	troupe master, so that there would be no suspicion of his real 	mission. So he did what his role required. "I apologize for 	alarming you. On behalf of my troupe, I accept."

	"Oh, 	thank you!" She flung her arms about him and kissed him.

	That, 	too, was interesting. She thought him a pedophile, with no interest 	in grown women. But in fact, were he not already taken, he would 	have found her interesting indeed. She was 	interesting.

	She 	recovered her composure. "The Roc's entourage will arrive 	tomorrow morning. Pack your things early." She departed.

	She'd 	have taken you to her bed, had you been interested.

	I 	f you took over her body, I would he interested.

	But 	it would reveal you as a normal man.

	And 	that was the rub.





	Chapter 18: Ragna


	They 	packed before dawn, knowing that this was the big event, Jim made 	food for them all, so that there would be no delay for breakfast. 	They were tensely ready.

	"Wait 	outside the city," Lullaby said.

	They 	marched out to the plain beside Elasti. There was a giant basket 	sitting there. It was the size of a house.

	"Get 	in," Lullaby said.

	They 	got in.

	Then 	the birds came: a squadron of monstrous roc hens, a winged brown 	mass that darkened the sky. They came in for a landing all around 	the basket: six of them. The ground shuddered as each put down her 	landing gear: enormous metallic talons. Sparks sprayed out as those 	claws slid across the hard surface of the landing field, braking the 	giant bodies.

	"Farewell," 	Lullaby said, stepping back. "I sincerely wish you well." 	She got well clear of 	the rocs, who waited impassively while she passed under the beak of 	one to get beyond their hexagon. The monstrous bird could have 	snapped her up and swallowed her in half a flick of an instant, but 	did not. That was another impressive example of the discipline of 	Ragna Roc's Minions of whatever species.

	Then 	the great birds caught lines in their talons, spread their wings, 	and taxied in formation for the takeoff. The lines stretched taut, 	connected to the basket. The rocs leaped into the air together, 	their wings blasting powerful downdrafts. They forged upward, and 	the basket hung between them, buffeted by peripheral turbulence. The 	troupe members hung on to the handholds all around the edge. This 	was a trip like no other. Their entire troupe, together with its 	folded tents and other paraphernalia, was being lofted as if it were 	just an incidental package.

	The 	rocs achieved traveling elevation, then stroked forward at cruising 	velocity. The wind of passage was so strong that vapor trails 	formed, obscuring the surrounding scenery. There was 	no way to tell exactly where they were going. This was not 	accidental, Cyrus realized; most folk had no idea where Ragna Roc 	lived. The Good Magician knew, but kept the secret, so as not to 	invite the malign attention of the Roc.

	Soon 	they arrived. Rocs flew so fast that all of Xanth was within 	minutes. They glided down toward Rock Candy Castle.

	There 	was a concerted gasp of awe from the actresses. "It's 	absolutely beautiful," Xina said.

	"Good 	enough to eat," the Witch agreed, "I'd love to have some 	of their leftover rubble to build a little candy house in the forest 	to attract children." It was humor; the Witch actually liked 	children, and both Rhythm and Kadence liked her.

	Tuff 	made as if to press her into the ground with his fist. "Volcanic 	rock is good enough."

	"I 	can duplicate rock candy," Jim said.

	"On 	that scale?"

	Jim 	sighed. "No. That's a whole mountain."

	And 	it was. The castle perched on a mountain of multicolored rock candy 	with outcroppings of translucent projections. The base of the castle 	was chocolate brown, giving way to lime green, and on up through 	other colors to the highest glassy tower. And what a tower it was! 	It had no spire, but was shaped into the form of a monstrous bowl,

	"It's 	a nest!" Aero Nymph exclaimed,

	"For 	Ragna Roc." Dusti agreed.

	The 	nearer they came, the larger the castle became. Stones that had 	seemed the size of dominoes turned out to be the size of cinder 	blocks, then of brightly faceted boulders. Tiny peepholes became 	sparkling windows. A mousehole of a door expanded into an elephant 	avenue. Rock Candy Castle was not only beautiful, it was enormous.

	The 	hen formation glided down onto a raised landing field that turned 	out to be quite large enough. The basket bumped to a halt. Then the 	rocs released the lines, spread their wings, and took off again. 	Their job was done.

	"I 	have to admit to being impressed," Cyrus murmured.

	Rhythm 	squeezed his hand. He glanced at her, and noticed she had two 	ribbons in her hair, one green, the other brown. He did not remember 	them; she must have done a quick primping just before the journey.

	They 	scrambled out of the basket, uncertain what was next. Would they be 	pitching their tents here? But the shining pavement was too hard for 	them to drive stakes into.

	A 	group of people appeared. "Hello, honored visitors," a man 	said. "I am Alex, and my talent is making stone invisible. We 	used it for windows in the lower stories. It is my pleasure to 	welcome you to Castle Rock Candy, and to make your stay here as 	pleasant as possible."

	"I 	am Cyrus Cyborg," Cyrus said, not completely at ease. "This 	is my troupe. We are here to present plays for the entourage of 	Ragna Roc."

	"Of 	course. But you are also much-appreciated guests. Because you may be 	understandably perplexed by the multitude of people and wonders 	here, we will provide each member of your troupe with a personal 	guide and assistant who will cater to your every need and 	inclination."

	"Oh, 	we don't need anything like that." Cyrus said, "All we 	need is a place to camp and pitch our tents, and a stage to put on 	our plays."

	The 	trace of a frown hovered in the vicinity of Alex's mouth. "This 	is standard procedure for visitors, by order of the Roc. We hope you 	don't find it burdensome."

	So 	it wasn't an option. Ragna would be keeping a close eye on every one 	of them. "In that case, thank you," Cyrus said, "But 	we shall want to camp together. We become uneasy when separated." 	Because who knew what mischief could befall them, without the others 	knowing?

	"Perhaps 	a compromise. We will provide you with a cluster of cottages your 	troupe may use as it wishes."

	"That 	would be nice." Cyrus agreed warily.

	"Let 	me introduce your guides." Alex snapped his fingers, and two 	almost identical young men stepped forward. "This is Obvious, 	who is quick to see the nature of any situation, and this is his 	twin brother Obvious-Lee, who cancels out that ability. They would 	like to assist sisters."

	Rhythm 	smiled. "I am Rhyme, and this is my little sister Kadence. We 	hope you know where the best rock candy for eating is." She was 	being deliberately childish, Cyrus knew, so as to conceal any hint 	of her real nature.

	"We 	do," Obvious said. He shot a glance at Lee. "And don't 	cancel that!"

	Kadence 	clapped her hands together. "Oh, goody! Let's go." She was 	playing her little sister role, which wasn't difficult for her 	because she'd been doing it all along.

	"Now 	be careful, dears,'' the Witch said, playing her motherly role. "You 	may eat only three pieces, so you won't get sick to your tummies."

	"But 	she didn't say how big those pieces can be," Rhythm stage 	whispered to Kadence. The two went off with the brothers, just like 	naughty children.

	"Maybe 	you had better keep an eye on the children," Cyrus said to the 	Witch. "Just in case. Their mother would be most annoyed if 	they got tummy aches."

	A 	woman stepped forward. "I am Kim, My talent is that I can't be 	harmed by mundane means, only magical means. I will guide you and 	help you keep an eye on the children. I have children of my own."

	"Thank 	you," the Witch said. Like Cyrus, she was not really easy with 	all this assistance, but all they could do was make the best of it. 	"But Kim, if you can't be harmed by magical means, you have 	nothing to fear from the Roc. So why are you here?"

	"I 	did not join Ragna from fear, but from promise: I will have a much 	better life serving the god than I ever would in garden-variety 	Xanth. I shall be glad to talk to you about it, because you, too. 	can have improvement."

	The 	Witch shot Cyrus a helpless glance. It seemed that each assistant 	was going to be working on a troupe member for conversion.

	The 	little party went off to find candy. Alex continued to assign guides 	to the members of the troupe. For Cyrus there was a man named Gole. 	Gole did not meet his gaze.

	"Is 	there a reason?" Cyrus asked, slightly puzzled and slightly 	more annoyed.

	"My 	talent is to gaze into a person's eyes and make an illusory copy 	that is exactly opposite in nature and talent," Gole said, "It 	lasts for only an hour, but anything it does with its talent is real 	and endures. So I will not meet your gaze unless there is reason, 	because you would probably not like what resulted."

	"I 	wouldn't," Cyrus agreed, shuddering. A talent like that could 	be dangerous.

	"But 	should anyone else try to bother you, then I would look into his or 	her face, and that person probably would be disu^cted for an hour." 	Gole allowed half a smile to escape. "But no one here will try 	to bother an honored guest."

	And 	what if Cyrus did something the Roc didn't like? Gole was surely an 	effective guard, but also a threat. Maybe that was the point: 	letting Cyrus know that he and his troupe had better behave.

	The 	last human member of the troupe to get an assistant was Curtis. This 	was Ray, who had the ability of 	rearranging his body in unusual ways. For example, he put one of his 	hands on the end of a leg. Then he put his head on the end of his 	arm where his hand had been. "Do you think I could be an 	actor?" he asked, smiling from that vantage,

	"Possibly," 	Curtis said, taken aback.

	Then 	came the Dragon Lady, Her assistant was a woman carrying a large 	dragonhead mask. "I am Masque," she said. "I make 	very special masks from living creatures. They imbue the wearer with 	one quality of the creature. This one is a dragon mask I will use 	myself." She put it on, and blasted out a jet of fire.

	"I'm 	impressed," Lady said, "What other masks do you have?"

	"A 	number," Masque said, removing the mask, "I have one for 	ogre strength, ugliness, or stupidity. Another for nymphly beauty. 	Would you like to see my collection?"

	"Yes 	I would, I wonder whether it would be possible to obtain a few masks 	from you, if I have anything to trade for them. Such as one to make 	me seem more human."

	"Certainly. 	You can have any you like, if you swear fealty to Ragna Roc."

	Oops. 	Cyrus winced.

	"I 	will think about it," the Lady said noncommittally. Bless her.

	Even 	Don Donkey got a companion, a silly ass named Burrito who constantly 	cracked lame jokes about digesting beans or cutting cheese, but was 	ever alert. It seemed the Big Bird didn't trust even a robot animal 	to be alone.

	They 	went as a group to the cottage cluster. This was on an open rock 	candy plateau at one side of the larger castle, and there were 	several pie trees growing in big tubs beside the cottages. Overall, 	it was a very nice site.

	"Here 	is yours," Gole said, bringing Cyrus to a cottage. It was 	beautiful, with pale blue translucent rock candy walls, a 	berry-straw thatched roof, and lovely flowers growing around it. 	"You may occupy it alone, or have company of your choice."

	"Company?"

	"Rhyme."

	Of 	course they knew about that; Lullaby would have informed them, 	"Thank you."

	"We 	have in mind giving you a day and night to acclimatize, then showing 	your three plays on consecutive nights following," Gole said,

	"That's 	considerate." It also gave the Minions longer to try to 	persuade the troupe members to defect.

	"But 	first, if you are ready, comes the interview with the Roc."

	"Interview?"

	"Ragna 	wishes to converse with you and Rhyme. Something about a prophecy."

	"Prophecy?" 	How much did they know?

	"Two 	to the Fifth. I don't pretend to understand what it means, but I am 	merely a lowly Minion, Ragna will surely have a greater 	perspective."

	They 	knew too much, "We will meet the Roc when Rhyme returns from 	her rock candy shopping."

	"She 	is already waiting outside the cottage."

	He 	was being channeled, but seemed to have no choice, "Thank you."

	Cyrus 	used the basin and pitcher provided to wash up, and the rock candy 	glass mirror to verify his appearance. He was nervous about this 	meeting, uncertain what would happen. Ragna might simply delete him, 	thus preemptively canceling his mission.

	Rhythm 	was indeed waiting outside, with Obvious, who had guided her to 	exactly where she needed to be. Obviously,

	"Did 	you hear?" Rhythm asked with girlish excitement. "We are 	getting to meet Ragna Roc!"

	"Yes," 	Cyrus agreed shortly. He was under no obligation to pretend naivetd 	about this dangerous encounter.

	The 	guides conducted the two of them through several large arched 	chambers, up an enormous circular stairway, and to the lofty nest 	that was the Roc's residence. They came out onto a raised rim that 	surrounded the nest.

	And 	there was Ragna Roc. He was a giant dull brown bird, undistinguished 	as rocs went, but still dauntingly impressive. Beside him. on the 	ledge, stood a kind-faced woman.

	The 	bird squawked.

	"Leave 	us," the woman said to the two guides. They walked quickly 	away.

	The 	bird squawked again.

	The 	woman turned to the two visitors. "Ragna Roc greets you, Cyrus 	Cyborg, and Princess Rhythm," she said. "I am Em Pathy, 	translating for the god. My talent is to alter emotions." She 	smiled briefly. "Do not be concerned; I am under strict orders 	to leave yours alone. Ragna desires an honest dialogue."

	So 	Rhythm's disguise had been penetrated.

	'Thank 	you, Em," Cyrus said. "It seems we are not fooling 	anyone."

	Ragna 	squawked,

	"He 	understands human talk," Em said. "And you are correct: he 	recognizes the Princess, and her two sisters."

	"Sisters?" 	Cyrus asked blankly.

	Squawk.

	'The 	two ribbons," Em translated. "Please resume your natural 	forms now. Princesses."

	Rhythm 	drew the green and brown ribbons from her hair and dangled them 	before her. They fluttered, shimmered, and fuzzed into vapor in the 	manner of a demon. The vapor coalesced into Princess Melody in a 	green dress, and Princess Harmony in brown.

	"You 	didn't tell me!" Cyrus exclaimed, astonished.

	"Secrets 	are best kept secret," Melody said.

	"So 	that they don't leak out," Harmony agreed.

	"And 	this one was important," Rhythm said.

	So 	they were back in their threesome mode. Cyrus was not completely 	pleased with the deception,

	Ragna 	squawked, amused.

	"Your 	purpose was to bring one Princess here," Em said. "She 	then conjured the others. So that the three of them could face Ragna 	together."

	"So 	it seems," Cyrus agreed wryly. "But how did Ragna know, if 	/ didn't know?"

	Squawk. 	"We have telepaths. It was in Princess Rhythm's mind."

	And 	there had been opportunity for telepaths to get close to Rhythm, as 	she toured the premises.

	"Ragna 	saw us coming," Cyrus said. "But why would he welcome his 	worst enemies to his home? That's dangerous."

	Squawk. 	"It is fated," Em said. "The climactic battle between 	the god and the mortals must come, to decide which shall govern 	hereafter, Ragna welcomes that decision, though it destroy much of 	what currently exists."

	"Welcomes 	it?" Cyrus was having trouble assimilating this.

	Squawk. 	Cyrus was beginning to hear the translations as part of the squawk. 	Maybe he was learning roc language.

	"The 	suspense is uncomfortable," Em said. "He would rather have 	it done with. It is better to have the battle at a time and location 	convenient to him, than to wait until the enemy precipitates it at a 	time convenient to the enemy."

	"I 	suppose so," Cyrus said. "But it seems the Princesses have 	been as eager to get to it as he is."

	"Yes, 	we are," Melody said,

	"We 	are uncomfortable with indecision too," Harmony agreed.

	'The 	issue must be settled," Rhythm concluded.

	The 	enormous beak twitched in the suggestion of a smile. Squawk. "And 	the three of you have never found any magic to match your merged 	power. You want to test it against a worthy opponent."

	"Of 	course not," Melody said insincerely.

	"We 	never considered that," Harmony agreed dubiously.

	"We're 	not like that," Rhythm concluded skeptically.

	Squawk. 	"Such a pleasure to deal with children. I am now too old to 	have such certainty about anything. Do you believe them, Cyrus?' "

	"No." 	And somehow the bird had found a way to put the two of them on the 	same side. The two of them? "Oh, no!"

	The 	three Princesses looked at him suspiciously. "What?" 	Melody demanded angrily.

	"You 	don't think we're up to it?" Harmony asked grimly.

	"I 	thought you loved me." Rhythm said tearfully.

	Squawk! 	None of them needed the translator's smirk to recognize the 	laughter.

	"None 	of the above," Cyrus said hastily. Now they had him 	embellishing with adverbs too. "It's that we may have 	misinterpreted the prediction."

	"Two 	to the Fifth," Em said, not needing the squawk.

	"We 	don't understand," Melody said, definitely not amused.

	'The 	Good Magicians words are meant to be confused," Harmony agreed, 	certainly without mirth.

	"So 	what the bleep are you talking about?" Rhythm concluded, 	positively annoyed.

	Her 	two sisters, Cyrus, Em, and the Roc all looked at her. startled. She 	was, after all, a child, and a female one at that. She should never 	had heard the word, let alone understood it or been able to utter 	it.

	"So 	to speak," Rhythm amended, embarrassed.

	"Methinks 	somebody has had too much adult experience," Melody said.

	"And 	remembered too much of it," Harmony agreed.

	Rhythm 	opened her mouth. A wisp of steam emerged.

	"What 	I mean," Cyrus said before she could speak, "is that we 	assumed that the Two were Rhythm and me. The question was who was 	the Fifth, which we thought was probably Ragna Roc. But suddenly I'm 	agreeing with Ragna against the three of you. As if he and I are the 	Two in this party of Five, and the three of you fill out the Five. 	That daunts me."

	The 	three Princesses looked dismayed.

	"Oh, 	no," Melody said, horrified,

	"It 	can not be," Harmony agreed, appalled.

	"You 	were always true to me," Rhythm concluded, distressed.

	Squawk. 	"If Cyrus joins Ragna, Rhythm will not oppose the Roc." Em 	translated. "He will win by default."

	"I'm 	not joining Ragna!" Cyrus exclaimed. "I just am not sure 	about that prophecy."

	Squawk. 	"We had better fathom it," Em said. "I think we are 	agreed that it signals the victor in this war."

	"War?" 	Cyrus asked.

	"The 	war between the god and the mortals. Whose final climactic battle 	will settle the issue for all time. The battle between Ragna and the 	combined magic might of the three most potent Sorceresses Xanth has 	to offer."

	Oh. 	That war. 	"And it seems that the first to fathom the real meaning of the 	prophecy will win that battle," Cyrus said.

	Squawk. 	"Again we are agreed. But as we know, it can be avoided if you 	will join me. There need be no ugliness at all."

	"Why 	are you talking with us. instead of blasting away at the 	Princesses?"

	Squawk. 	"That is not the way such things are done. There is a protocol. 	Also, I would much rather have the Princesses serving me. than 	deleted. Their merged power is surely second only to my own. And we 	have not yet enjoyed your plays."

	Cyrus 	shook his head, bemused. "You would delay the final battle so 	as to watch a play?"

	Squawk. 	"Indubitably. It won't be possible to watch them after the 	battle. Either I will be gone, or all of you will be gone."

	That 	put it in chill perspective. "How do any of us know someone 	won't cheat? A sneak attack, or something?"

	Squawk. 	"Surprise is impossible. We have been feeling each other out 	throughout."

	Cyrus 	looked at the Princesses. They slowly nodded, together Now he felt 	the tingling atmosphere of powerful magic. They were already in the 	battle, or at least the preliminaries of it. It hardly seemed to 	matter that it was a bird against children; it was sheer brutal 	magic force.

	'Then 	suppose we schedule this final confrontation for the day after the 	last play." Cyrus said. "That is. the fourth day hence?" 	And realized as he spoke that this made it a five day event. The 	battle on the Fifth?

	Squawk. 	"And ponder the prophecy in the interim," Ragna agreed.

	The 	three Princesses nodded again, in concert. They seemed slightly 	distracted, and he realized it was because of the stress of opposing 	magic,

	"Agreed," 	Cyrus said.

	Squawk. 	"And if the prophecy turns out to favor me, the offer remains 	open, for you and the Princesses. Meanwhile, you have the freedom of 	Castle Rock Candy. Enjoy yourselves."

	'Thank 	you."

	Ragna 	closed his eyes, dismissing them. Em Pathy smiled. "That went 	well. Ragna likes you." She walked along the ledge to the exit.

	Their 	guides appeared. It was time to return to the camp.

	Now 	the girls relaxed. "That was interesting." Melody said.

	"He's 	very strong," Harmony agreed.

	"Maybe 	too strong," Rhythm concluded.

	"How 	can you say that?" Cyrus demanded. All of them were ignoring 	their guides, as there was nothing secret remaining.

	They 	turned a triply serious gaze on him. At this moment, none of them 	seemed childish. "We have to assess the matter accurately," 	Melody said.

	"Because 	to do otherwise would be to invite disaster," Harmony agreed.

	"And 	his power is equivalent to ours," Rhythm concluded,

	Cyrus 	was taken aback. "To your cubed power?"

	They 	nodded in concert again.

	"And 	if he can defeat the three of you, there is no other magic in Xanth 	that could oppose him?"

	"Only 	one," Melody said,

	"The 	Demon Xanth," Harmony agreed.

	"And 	he won't interfere," Rhythm concluded.

	"And 	the prophecy Two to the Fifth is the key to victory," Cyrus 	said.

	"You 	had better figure it out soon," Melody said,

	"Within 	three days," Harmony agreed,

	"Before 	the final battle," Rhythm concluded. "Now, if we are 	through being triplets, why don't the two of you go tour the 	castle?"

	"Nuh-uh," 	Melody said,

	"He'll 	never figure out anything if you have at him," Harmony agreed. 	"Those decade-aged panties are deadly."

	"Bleep," 	Rhythm concluded. This time the other two laughed, together They 	definitely knew more about panties than girls their age were 	supposed to. The Adult Conspiracy was surely struggling to keep some 	sort of restraint on them.

	Thus 	it was that Cyrus returned to his cottage, alone. Rhythm would not 	be visiting him tonight. "Bleep," he echoed,

	"She's 	right," Melete said. "You have to focus on the prophecy. 	That's the key,"

	"But 	there are so many ways it can be interpreted! I'm at a loss." 	Actually they were talking silently, so as not to alert listening 	spies about either his thoughts or Melete's existence as more than 	an inert block.

	"Cyrus, 	you are the creative one in this troupe. You write the plays. You 	have to work this out. No one else can do it. Not even the Roc, it 	seems." She was nagging him, as was her 	wont. He had long since ceased resenting it, as her constant 	prodding was largely responsible for his success as a playwright. He 	might be creative, but she was the one who kept him at it. Without 	that writer's block 	he would never have made it.

	"The 	Princesses say that his 	power matches theirs. How can an obscure prophecy have any effect?"

	"That 	is for you to discover," she said firmly. "The fate of 	Xanth may depend on it."

	He 	tried to focus. "I suppose if the sides were 	evenly matched, any slight tilt 	could decide it."

	"Keep 	working it out," she agreed.

	"Two 	to the Fifth. If Two's 	not Rhythm and me, who is 	it?"

	"Does 	it matter? You're both here regardless. It's 	the Fifth that's the real mystery."

	So 	it seemed. "It has to be the fifth of some series."

	"Why?"

	That 	stopped him. "Why not'.'"

	"It 	could be anything."

	Cyrus 	groaned. "Like a fifth of whiskey? 	The Mundane Fifth amendment about not incriminating yourself?" 	He paused. "That's tempting. Could it get me out of trouble 	associating with a child? What about the Fifth Commandment, to honor 	your father and your mother? Only I'm a father now, and Rhythm is a 	mother. How can that relate to defeating the Roc?"

	"Don't 	dismiss anything," Melete warned. 	"It may relate in 	a way we haven't yet 	thought of,"

	"Then 	there's math: two to the fifth power. That's thirty-two. That has 	nothing to do with anything.''

	"Oh, 	I'm sure the Muse of History could think of something."

	"What 	about the fifth dimension'.'"

	"What 	is that?"

	"I'm 	not sure. My data bank says a dimension is any measurable extent or 	quality, and specifies four: length, breadth, depth, and duration."

	"Space 	and time," Melete agreed. "You need one more ."

	"Well, 	there's mass. You can 	measure it in the form of weight or 	inertia. A rock and a 	her wont. He had long since ceased resenting it, 	as her constant prodding was largely responsible for his success as 	a playwright. He might be creative, but she was the one who kept him 	at it. Without that writer's block 	he would never have made it.

	"The 	Princesses say that his 	power matches theirs. How can an obscure prophecy have any effect?"

	"That 	is for you to discover," she said firmly. "The fate of 	Xanth may depend on it."

	He 	tried to focus. "I suppose if the sides were 	evenly matched, any slight tilt 	could decide it."

	"Keep 	working it out," she agreed.

	"Two 	to the Fifth. If Two's 	not Rhythm and me, who is 	it?"

	"Does 	it matter? You're both here regardless. It's 	the Fifth that's the real mystery."

	So 	it seemed. "It has to be the fifth of some series."

	"Why?"

	That 	stopped him. "Why not'.'"

	"It 	could be anything."

	Cyrus 	groaned. "Like a fifth of whiskey? 	The Mundane Fifth amendment about not incriminating yourself?" 	He paused. "That's tempting. Could it get me out of trouble 	associating with a child? What about the Fifth Commandment, to honor 	your father and your mother? Only I'm a father now, and Rhythm is a 	mother. How can that relate to defeating the Roc?"

	"Don't 	dismiss anything," Melete warned. 	"It may relate in 	a way we haven't yet 	thought of,"

	"Then 	there's math: two to the fifth power. That's thirty-two. That has 	nothing to do with anything.''

	"Oh, 	I'm sure the Muse of History could think of something."

	"What 	about the fifth dimension'.'"

	"What 	is that?"

	"I'm 	not sure. My data bank says a dimension is any measurable extent or 	quality, and specifies four: length, breadth, depth, and duration."

	"Space 	and time," Melete agreed. "You need one more ."

	"Well, 	there's mass. You can 	measure it in the form of weight or 	inertia. A rock and a 	puffball may be the same size, but the rock has a 	lot more mass, so has more impact. Without at least some mass, a 	thing would not exist, any more than if it were missing one of the 	other dimensions. It might look the same, but it wouldn't be real."

	"What 	would it be?"

	"Illusion."

	Then 	he paused, a revelation spreading through him. "Illusion! 	That's what Ragna Roc makes of real people. He deletes their mass!"

	"He 	uses the fifth dimension," iVIelete agreed.

	"We 	have figured out the Fifth! The fifth dimension! It is the Roc's 	power!"

	"I 	believe we have," Melete agreed, "So maybe you and Rhythm 	have to find a way to nullify that power,"

	"But 	the Princesses can't just block it; they say Ragna is as strong as 	they are."

	"In 	a straight contest of magical power," Melete agreed. "That 	is surely where the prophecy comes in: to point out a way to nullify 	the Roc's power."

	"But 	if Rhythm and I are the Two, and even all three Princesses can't 	nullify the Fifth, what is left?"

	"You 	are left. The Princesses can oppose 	the Roc without any clear decision. You must be the missing factor."

	"And 	what can I do? All I've done so far is mess up Rhythm's life by 	providing her with a daughter. And Kadence is a fluke, not supposed 	to exist at her age for another sixteen or seventeen years."

	"She's 	like another illusion," Melete agreed.

	"Yes. 	She should exist only in our imagination, but instead she's solid. 	As though she has been undeleted, A gift of the fifth dimension."

	Then 	Cyrus and Melete exchanged a glance of sheer wonder. "Could she 	be the key?" Melete asked,

	"But 	her talent doesn't relate. She makes folk march in step. That won't 	stop the Roc."

	Melete 	nodded. "There must be something else."

	May 	I say something?

	It 	was Anona, the Pique Ant. Cyrus had put her in his pocket and 	completely forgotten her.

	"Of 	course, Anona," Melete said,

	"You 	two know each other?" Cyrus asked.

	"We 	communed when you brought her home," Melete said. "We're 	both telepathic. It helps. She's a nice person."

	Cyrus 	felt guilty for forgetting her. "What do you wish to say?"

	/ 	have picked up on your discussions, and 	pondered the matter of Ragna's weakness. It seems to me that maybe 	he can't delete something t^ice. He's never done it, as far as you 	have heard.

	Cyrus 	considered. "That's right. That Minion he deleted, then 	undeleted, he didn't delete again, but banished him instead. I 	thought he just didn't want to hurt someone unnecessarily."

	"Yet 	he had no compunctions deleting an entire innocent village," 	Melete said.

	So 	maybe he didn't do it out of compassion, which he seems to lack, but 	because he couldn't, Anona thought. If 	so, that's a weakness, isn't it'.'

	"A 	huge one," Cyrus agreed, "If we could just figure out a 	way to use it against him."

	Well. 	I thought that maybe if you build a big cage out of undeleted 	material and put him in it, he couldn't escape. That would defeat 	him, wouldn't it?

	"Build 	a cage of undeleted material," Cyrus echoed, "Confining 	him. Maybe a big egg shell so he couldn't see out of it. That just 	might do it. But how could that be done? He's not going to just sit 	around while we collect all that loose material and assemble it. 	He'll delete anyone who tries."

	/ 	thought maybe we ants could do that. He 	wouldn't even notice us, and we're very good at collecting and 	assembling. Except we're somewhat disorganized, so it woidd take a 	long time.

	"We 	don't have a long time."

	"But 	we do have Kadence," Melete reminded him.

	"Whose 	talent is organization!" he agreed. "She could direct a 	mound of ants to do it in hours instead of months."

	"And 	Ragna would never suspect, because he wouldn't see the ants and 	Kadence is just a child who shouldn't exist," Melete said.

	"I 	think we've got it," Cyrus agreed, "Our secret weapon is a 	person from the fifth dimension. Except that all we have is one 	ant."

	The 	Princesses could summon the rest of my hill, conjuring all the ants 	here. If they wanted to.

	"I'll 	ask them!"

	"No," 	Melete said, "/'// ask Rhythm, so there's nothing spoken aloud. 	You go about your business of putting on the plays."

	"Talk 	to Kadence too," he said. "But assuming we get the cage 	made, how can we get Ragna in it?"

	"That 	will be your challenge," Melete said.

	He 	had been afraid of that.

	There 	is something else, Anona thought.

	Cyrus 	had learned respect for the ants thoughts, "What is it?"

	Won't 	they read your mind, and know your 	plan?

	Cyrus 	shared a devastated glance with Melete, Of course the Roc's tame 	telepaths would do that! "What can I do?"

	What 	about the lethe elixir?

	"The 	what?"

	When 	you put me in your pocket, there was a vial there. I recognized it 	as containing three drops of lethe. 	We Pique Ants have 	had some experience with that sort 	of thing, and are 	largely immune. That's why you forgot about me: it has an ambiance. 	That dose would be enough to make you forget this matter for at 	least three days. Four at the most: it hasn't been tested on c 	yborgs.

	"The 	lethe Algebra Nymph gave me!" he exclaimed, remembering. That 	ambiance, as she put it, must have made him forget the vial as well 	as the ant. "She said I would need it at some point."

	"This 	is that point," Melete agreed, "Take it. We can't let you 	carry that plan in your head these next three days. Not with those 	anonymous telepaths lurking. We have to clear it out immediately."

	"But 	then how can I plan to lead the roc to the shell?"

	"You 	will have to think fast then. Take the lethe."

	Cyrus 	sighed. It did seem necessary. Still, he hesitated. "Suppose it 	wears off too soon—or too late? They could read my mind before 	the battle, or I wouldn't be able to invoke the plan. 	Either way is dangerous."

	"Stop 	temporizing," Melete said severely. "Anona and I will know 	what's going on, and we'll direct Kadence without explaining, so she 	can't give away the plan either. We'll divert you or prod you as 	necessary."

	He 	reluctantly fished the vial out of his pocket. It was so small he 	couldn't uncap it, "How do I open it?"

	"Just 	chew it up," Melete said. "It's not glass."

	He 	put the vial in his mouth. "Let me forget about the plan to 	stop Ragna Roc," he said. "And that I even have a plan." 	Then he chewed down hard.

	"Now 	it's our turn," Melete said. Cyrus wondered what she meant by 	that, because he couldn't remember anything relevant.





	Chapter 19: Battle


	The 	troupe members enjoyed being feted, each attended by an attentive 	guide, and they loved the luxury and beauty of Castle Rock Candy. 	They didn't like the constant solicitations to enlist with the Roc, 	but were cautious in their demurrals lest it end their royal 	treatment.

	Cyrus 	stayed away from the Princesses and focused on the presentation of 	the three plays. They were well received, especially the second one, 	"The Dream," because of the prominence of the Dragon Lady. 	It seemed they related very well to the association with a nonhuman 	creature.

	"We 	have let it be known," the Witch said 	to him, "that you 	are the troupe 	leader and we will stay with you. So if you join the Roc, so will we 	."

	"I'll 	never do that!"

	She 	cautioned him with a finger. "Be not so emphatic. We want to 	give them serious hope, at least until the showdown. It keeps them 	helpful."

	"Less 	emphasis," he agreed. "But you 	know, if we lose the showdown—"

	"Then 	we will join 	rather than be deleted. It is the sensible 	course. But we hope not to lose. We trust that you have some secret 	strategy for a surprising victory."

	"I 	appreciate your trust," he said wryly. How could he tell her 	that he had never figured out any plan'.' The members of the troupe 	were trusting him, and he wished he were more deserving of their 	trust.

	The 	last play concluded. The battle would be the following day.

	Em 	Pathy approached Cyrus. She was attractively dressed, and quite 	pretty. "As you know, I speak for Ragna," she murmured.

	"Yes."

	"He 	would really like you to enlist, and not 	merely to avoid what is bound to be a 	bruising battle. He respects you, and would like 	to have your creative imagination supporting his realm."

	"If 	he defeats the Princesses, who can say what I will do? I love 	Princess Rhythm."

	"If 	he defeats the Princesses, there will be a separate negotiation. But 	the chances are that Princess Rhythm will be gone, and you will be 	intent on vengeance. It might be dangerous to bring you in then. He 	prefers to bring you in voluntarily, before the battle."

	"I 	 can't do that," Cyrus said uncomfortably, "I am loyal to 	the old order."

	"It 	is that loyalty he appreciates, in part. For your sake, he will try 	to spare Princess Rhythm. But this may not be possible. Should the 	worst happen, he wants you to know that he will try to make it up to 	you."

	"Oh?"

	"By 	providing you with another compatible woman. He now knows you are 	not a pedophile."

	So 	their telepaths had been reading his mind, and knew the real nature 	of that romance. Cyrus repressed an angry retort. "I don't want 	any other woman.' '

	"For 	example, me," she said. "I can be extremely 	understanding." She inhaled, smiling.

	Suddenly 	she was more than attractive; she was compelling. He found himself 	overflowing with desire for her He wanted to take her in his arms, 	kiss her, and go oh so much farther, reveling in the sheer awareness 	of her closeness.

	Then 	he caught on. "You're altering my emotion!

	The 	effect faded. "Merely a demonstration. If you should lose the 	Princess, I could ease your pain and make you happy. Do not close 	off that option carelessly."

	He 	realized that what she said was true. She could change his feelings. 	In order to avoid that, he answered very cautiously. "I will 	keep that in mind. But I do not want to stop loving the Princess."

	"You 	are loyal. I value that. I am loyal to Ragna. But if by some foul 	chance he loses the battle, you may recruit me if you choose." 	She gave him a last tender tinge of desire, then walked away,

	"That 	woman is dangerous," he said later to Melete. "And not 	just because of whom she serves,"

	'True. 	Do not make an enemy of her She could be extremely useful if we 	win." "Oh, I see. But if he wins—"

	"Rhythm 	may be gone."

	He 	had to see that they beat the Roc! But how? It was almost as if he 	had lost interest in formulating a plan of action. What was wrong 	with him?

	"I'm 	sure you'll think of something," Melete said.

	"But 	I haven't] I 	have no idea what to do!" With her, at least, he could be 	honest.

	"Maybe 	the Princesses will defeat the Roc tomorrow," she said. "Then 	it won't matter any more."

	"I 	wish I could be sure of that. But I'm afraid I have led them into a 	deadly trap. If they die it will be my fault."

	"Cyrus," 	she said seriously, "This battle was fated. They would have had 	to meet Ragna sometime. It is better to do it now, before he takes 	over any more of Xanth, Win or lose, it's not your fault."

	"But 	it feels like 	my fault."

	"I 	would comfort you if I could."

	"Rhythm 	could comfort me. Where is she?"

	"She 	and her sisters are preparing to battle Ragna tomorrow morning. They 	can't afford to have you distracting them at this time. It could be 	the death of them."

	"I 	know it," he said miserably. "I'll leave Rhythm alone."

	"Now 	sleep," Melete said. "You will need your wits about you 	tomorrow."

	"To 	watch a battle I can't affect? To betray the trust of my troupe?"

	'Trust 	me, Cyrus. You are doing your part."

	He 	gazed at her. He did trust her. But he couldn't believe her.

	Yet, 	somehow, he managed to sleep soundly. Maybe someone had put a sleep 	spell on him.

	In 	the morning the three Princesses were waiting by his door with their 	guides and the rest of the troupe. Rhythm stepped forward. "In 	case I don't make it." she murmured, "remember that I love 	you, regardless of my age." Then she kissed him in front of 	everyone.

	"Oh. 	Rhythm!" he said as he held her. "I'll always love you!"

	"Stay 	with Kadence, please. Make a family for her." She wiped away a 	tear. At this stage. she was only 	technically a child.

	"I 	will!" he said, half blinded by tears himself.

	She 	returned to her sisters. They began the march to the Roc's nest.

	Kadence 	came up. He took her hand. They followed the Princesses. The rest of 	the troupe was behind.

	They 	came to the Nest. There was Ragna Roc, huge and imposing. Beside him 	stood Em Pathy.

	"The 	battle will commence when I lower my hand," Em said without 	preamble. She raised her right arm.

	Melody. 	Harmony, and Rhythm stood together at the rim of the nest, facing 	Ragna Roc. They nodded together, ready.

	There 	was no other preliminary. Em dropped her arm.

	Nothing 	happened. The troupe members looked at each other, perplexed. When 	was it going to start?

	Then 	Cyrus saw that Ragna Roc was absolutely still. Not a single feather 	moved. And the three Princesses were frozen in place like statues. 	Bird and girls were staring intently at each other, doing nothing 	else.

	Nothing? 	They were doing everything! Ragna was trying to delete them, and 	they were fighting back and perhaps using his own power against him, 	maybe reflecting it or converting it to something else. The battle 	was invisible, but it was being waged.

	Now 	Cyrus felt a tingling in his hair and on his skin. All the hairs of 	his body were trying to lift themselves up, as if electrically 	charged. There was enormous magic suffusing the area, touching them 	all peripherally.

	"Daddy!" 	Kadence cried, scared.

	He 	looked at her. Her hair was drawing itself up from her scalp, 	spreading out. radiating from her head like a spiked helmet.

	"It's 	the magic," he whispered. "It's not directed at you. It's 	because of the battle. It's so intense it infuses everything and 	spreads out, like a hot potato cooling. They are trying to destroy 	each other."

	"Oh," 	she said, not seeming very much reassured. "I thought I was 	terrified." She reconsidered. "I am 	terrified!"

	Cyrus 	looked around. The hair was spreading out on all the troupe members, 	and on the Minions too. "We all are, dear. But all we can do is 	wait, and hope."

	Something 	changed in her expression. "No. Anona says we have more to do."

	"Anona 	Ant?" He had quite forgotten her since first putting her in his 	pocket. How did she relate?

	"She's 	in my hair," Kadence said. "Hanging on desperately. She's 	directing me."

	"Directing 	you?" Cyrus was at a loss to comprehend this.

	"Come 	with me. Father."

	"But 	the battle isn't finished."

	"Go 	with her," Melete said from his pocket. He didn't remember 	putting her there, but he must have done so.

	Kadence 	took him by the hand and led him from the Nest. No one else moved; 	they were all standing distracted, hair spiking, hardly breathing. 	The magic was so thick it seemed difficult to pass through it. Oh, 	yes, the battle was happening!

	As 	they passed through the halls and chambers of the castle, Cyrus 	noticed something else. The rock candy stones were melting. Not a 	lot, but their sharp edges were rounding off. and their flat planes 	were warping slightly. The intense magic was evidently generating 	heat that softened the material. If that continued, this castle 	would became a physically dangerous place, because there was an 	awful lot of candy rock in it.

	He 	remembered how daunting it was to be in the vicinity when the three 	Princesses focused together on a spot project. They were children, 	but their merged and cubed magic was as strong as any in Xanth. Yet 	Ragna Roc was attacking them with confidence, and so far, making it 	stick. It was awesome and, yes, scary.

	There 	were Minions here and there, but none of them paid attention to the 	two visitors in their midst. They were standing in place, hair 	outstretched, taken by the awful power of the surrounding magic.

	They 	came to the roof where the roc hens had landed. The basket remained, 	and beside it was a huge egg with a hinged top. It was big enough to 	hold several rocs. Ants were swarming over it, applying the 	finishing touches.

	"What 	is this?" Cyrus asked.

	"It 	is your project. Father. Don't you remember?"

	"No. 	I know nothing of this."

	"Because 	you took those three drops of lethe elixir to make you foi^et. They 	should be wearing off any time now. This 	is an egg made from undeleted material—stuff the Roc deleted, 	then undeleted, so can't delete again. Anona Ant is directing me, 	and I'm coordinating all the other ants in her Hill, which the 	Princesses conjured here three days ago and then took sniffs of some 	lethe elixir they also conjured from where Roc Ette used to live, to 	make them forget. Ragna will not be able to get out of this egg, 	once it closes about him. But there's one problem."

	Cyrus 	did not need to remember anything to understand that. "Getting 	him into it."

	"Yes. 	That's your job. If he beats the Princesses, we can still win, if 	you get him in there. But there's another problem. That lid is too 	heavy for the ants to move quickly. He'd escape long before they 	could close it."

	Cyrus 	looked at the huge lid. "Too big for me too."

	"Think 	of a way, Cyrus," Melete urged him.

	It 	was beginning to come back, "I worked this out," he said. 	"Then took lethe so the telepaths couldn't find out from my 	mind. But I didn't think of that detail."

	"Think 	of it now," Melete said.

	Cyrus 	focused his creativity. A dim bulb flashed. "Roc Ette!"

	"Who?" 	Kadence asked.

	"The 	roc hen he captured after deleting the entire village that had 	helped her escape him. She's part of his harem."

	"What's 	a harem. Father?"

	He 	opened his mouth, but was abruptly balked by the Adult Conspiracy. 	"A special group of women. The pwint is, she doesn't want to be 	there. She surely hates Ragna."

	"She 	could close the egg!" Kadence exclaimed. She was a bright 	child.

	"Yes, 	If I can find her in time,"

	"I 	know where there's a flock of roc hens," Kadence said, "I 	saw them when we toured the castle."

	"That 	has to be them. Take me there."

	She 	led him to another section of the castle. The trip was harrowing, 	because roc candy blocks were starting to fall into the halls, and 	here and there they could hear roofs collapsing. The castle was 	being destroyed, yet no one was touching it. How long could this go 	on?

	They 	reached the hens. These, too, were mesmerized by the transcendent 	magic atmosphere. They perched hunched, their feathers extended in 	the manner of the hair on the humans. But which one was Ette?

	"Call 	her," Melete advised. "The others won't care."

	"Roc 	Ette!" he called.

	One 	huge head turned toward him. This was a very pretty roc. Now he saw 	that her wingfeathers were not extended. He remembered why: they had 	been deleted. They were illusion. She could not fly. It was a 	horrible punishment for a bird, any bird.

	"Roc 	ttte," he said. "I am Cyrus Cyborg, I saw how the entire 	village of your human friends was deleted. I am fighting Ragna, but 	I need your help. Together maybe we can put him away."

	She 	nodded. She understood him. She hopped down from her perch.

	"This 	way," he said. "To the roof." He explained as he and 	Kadence ran around the growing rubble and melt, and Ette followed.

	Fortunately 	the landing area was more solidly constructed than the more 	decorative portions of the castle. Maybe it was underpinned by 	regular rock instead of candy. It remained firm enough to support 	the roc hen's weight.

	"So 	if you can hide behind the basket, then jump out and push the lid 	closed when he's in it, he will be trapped," Cyrus concluded. 	"Will you do that?"

	Ette 	nodded. There was something very like a grim smile on her beak.

	The 	trap was set. Now all he had to do was get Ragna here, and into the 	egg. If he could just figure out a way.

	"I 	must go," Cyrus said, "I congratulate you, Anona, Kadence, 	and the Pique Ants. You have done an excellent job."

	Kadence 	remained by the shell, organizing the ants as they shored up any 	possible weak spots. They would have the shell ready for occupancy 	on time.

	The 	collapse of the castle was accelerating as he returned to the Nest, 	He had to climb over forming piles of half-melted rubble. Yet still 	the contest of magic continued. It seemed that the opposing forces 	were so nearly equal that there was no way out except to continue.

	How 	was he to get the big bird past all this and into the shell? Cyrus 	still had no idea.

	He 	came to the Nest. Ragna still faced the three Princesses. None of 	them had moved. But now the rest of the castle was collapsing around 	them. The people were fleeing, both Minions and troupe members. It 	wasn't any change of loyalties so much as fear that they would be 	crushed in falling blocks of rock candy, or stuck in melting goo.

	Now 	at last there began to be some change. Ragna's feathers were 	drooping, and the Princesses were wavering. Then Melody sank to her 	knees.

	"No!" 	Cyrus cried in anguish.

	"Yes," 	 Em Pathy said, returning to the scene, "Did you really 	think mere Sorceresses could defeat a god?"

	"I 	did," he said, seeing Harmony also sink.

	"I'm 	surprised they lasted as long as this. I thought he would delete 	them in the first few minutes."

	"Go 	poop your panties, pooch."

	"In 	a few more minutes you will belong to me, Cyrus. Then you 	will welcome my panties."

	The 	awful thing was that he knew she meant it. She had taken a fancy to 	him, and would rule his emotion once the way had been cleared.

	They 	watched as Rhythm sank to her knees. The ambiance of magic was 	overwhelming the three; they could not hold out much longer.

	And 	when they lost, what of his love? A bulb flashed over his head, and 	such was the intensity of magic that it overheated and exploded with 	a pop. He could make a difference!

	Cyrus 	jumped into the Nest and slid down its curving side to the roc's 	giant feet. "You big pile of piffle!" he yelled, kicking a 	talon, "All you can do is attack little girls!"

	"Cyrus!" 	Em called, horrified, "Get out of there! You can't attack a 	god!"

	He 	ignored her. "You must be really proud of yourself, birdbrain! 	Beating up on children!" He stomped the talon.

	Now 	he got Ragna's attention. The roc glared down at him. But to do 	that, he had to remove his deadly gaze from the Princesses. He could 	not focus his magic without looking.

	"Why 	don't you try to delete someone your own size, feather-face?" 	Cyrus demanded. "Don't have the nerve, Raggy?"

	Ragna 	stirred. He tried to orient his head so that both eyes could focus 	on the annoyance. That gave Cyrus a notion.

	"You 	can't delete what you can't focus on!" he yelled. "And I'm 	too close for you to focus, cross-eyes!"

	Now 	there was a stir of anger. A foot twitched up. But Cyrus was already 	scrambling over the other foot and around to the far side of the 	Nest.

	"Get 	your tail in gear!" he yelled, kicking at a tail feather. He 	didn't do the huge thing any damage, but his effort was surely quite 	annoying. "You can't catch me, birdlime!"

	He 	definitely had Ragna's attention. The Roc half spread his wings and 	spun about, trying to orient his beak for an attack. But Cyrus was 	on his way up the side and out of the Nest.

	"You're 	crazy!" Em called. "You're throwing your foolish life 	away, when you could have so much fun with me!"

	"I'm 	having fun with Ragna Rook!" he called over his shoulder as he 	ran from the Nest.

	Now 	the chase was on in earnest, Cyrus fled through the rubble of the 	castle, dodging from side to side in an attempt to prevent the roc 	from focusing on him, Ragna pursued, enraged,

	"Ragna!" 	Em called. "Don't let him distract you from the battle! The 	girls aren't dead yet!"

	"Sure, 	go back to the girls, you horrendous hunk of deleted droppings!" 	Cyrus encouraged him. "They're more your speed."

	"Let 	him go, Ragna!" Em called. "He's not worth your effort."

	The 	Roc ignored her sensible advice. He was trying to focus on Cyrus.

	Cyrus 	realized as he ran that his hair was no longer standing on end. The 	potent aura of magic had faded; the battle with the Princesses was 	no longer in progress. He had succeeded in distracting the bird, as 	he had intended,

	Cyrus 	dodged around a pile of half-melted rock candy, staying out of the 	direct line of sight. There was a crash as the pile collapsed in on 	itself; Cyrus realized that the Roc had deleted the bottom of it. 	where he had just dodged, and so the top had lost support and 	dropped down. He was glad he was a cyborg, with half-machine 	strength; otherwise he would not have gotten clear in time.

	He 	came up on a statue of a bare nymph. Actually that was redundant; 	all nymphs were bare until some became real women and donned 	clothing. She probably represented a morsel of food rather than a 	stork object. He ran around her—and her fair head plunged to 	the floor, leaving her deleted body standing in place,

	Cyrus 	knew he had better get where he was going soon, because otherwise he 	would become illusion on the way. He ran behind more rubble, then 	dodged back the opposite direction as it 	collapsed.

	The 	way was awkward, but he was angling for the roof and the shell. He 	kept yelling insults and lurching in different directions, hoping 	that the Roc would follow without ever getting the right range. He 	knew he would be terrified if he ever paused to think about it.

	Somehow 	he succeeded. There was the basket and the shell. He ran straight 	for them, feeling the breath of the Roc right behind him.

	"A 	place to hide!" he cried, "He won't find me there!" 	He ran up a convenient pile of rubble and leaped for the huge shell. 	He caught the rim, and heaved himself inside. He slid down the 	curving inner shell. Would this ruse work?

	There 	was an angry squawk outside. The Roc must have tried to delete the 	shell, and been unable. That, with luck, infuriated him. His 	annoying prey was escaping.

	Suddenly 	the top darkened. Then the huge body landed inside. Cyrus barely 	managed to scramble out of the way of the descending mass. "Curses! 	He found me!" he yelled.

	Ragna 	oriented on the sound. His eyes found Cyrus, and started to focus.

	The 	lid slammed shut. Suddenly it was dark inside.

	"Squawk?" 	Ragna asked, surprised.

	"Listen, 	rock-head, the trap has sprung," Cyrus said loudly. "This 	shell is made of undeleted material, and built to withstand any 	physical force you can apply. You are a prisoner."

	There 	was a shaft of light from a large peephole. Cyrus went to stand in 	its wan illumination. "Go ahead," he said. "Delete 	me. Then you'll be entirely alone. You know they'll never let you 	out. They'll poke food into the hole so you won't starve, and remove 	your refuse, because the folk of Xanth aren't brutes, but they'll 	never free you,"

	There 	was silence. The Roc was listening,

	"This 	was my doing," Cyrus continued. "I devised this trap, and 	had the ants make it, and I led you to it. It is not entirely 	unkind; there is a hypno-gourd here that you will be able to peek 	into and range the entire dream realm at your leisure. You won't be 	bored. But you will need a companion, if only to interrupt your eye 	contact occasionally so you will not starve to death. So now you 	have a choice: destroy me and be forever alone, or listen to the 	deal I proffer."

	He 	paused, but there was no response, so he continued. "I will 	arrange an exchange, if you wish: me for a roc hen to keep you 	company and assist with the gourd. Or any other creature you choose, 	who wants to be with you. Maybe Em Pathy. your translator."

	Now 	there was a negative squawk. "I thought not. She's loyal to 	you, but not your kind. You want the hen. Here is how we will 	arrange it: you will delete me, I'll walk through this shell and 	arrange for the hen to come here, you will peer at her through the 	peep hole, and if you are satisfied you will undelete me and delete 	her so she can come in here where you can undelete her. Then she 	will be yours forever. Is that satisfactory?"

	There 	was half a squawk,

	"Ah 	yes. How can you trust me to do as I promise? The answer is, you 	will have to. There are reasons why you wanted to recruit me to your 	team, and trustworthiness is one of them. I never pretended to you 	or your Minions that I planned to join you; I always served the 	other side. I was true to my commitment. I will be true to this one. 	But since I can't necessarily trust you, 	I will insist on your undeleting me 	before the hen joins you, I will obtain her commitment to join you 	after I am undeleted, and to refuse to join you if I remain deleted. 	That is the deal I proffer. If you don't like it, make me a 	counteroffer. We can surely get Em Pathy to come to the peephole to 	translate."

	There 	was a pause. Then Cyrus felt a change. His substance was gone. He 	had been deleted!

	"Thank 	you," he said. But no sound came out, because he had no solid 	vocal cords.

	He 	turned and walked through the shell wall. Em Pathy was there; she 	had followed them. She had evidently had experience with this sort 	of thing before. She pointed to a fragment of slate lying beside the 	big basket.

	Cyrus 	went to it and picked it up. It was deleted; it felt solid to him 	and came up in his hands. There was a stylus attached. He took that 	and wrote:

	WE 	MADE A DEAL. BRING A ROC HEN TO SHARE HIS EXILE.

	She 	shook her head. "They all hate him," she said. "They 	have already flown the coop. None will come."

	Oops. 	What was he to do now?

	Then 	Roc Ette appeared. She read his sign. She nodded.

	This 	astonished him. but he took you by force, 	you hate him worst of all.

	She 	nodded again.

	I 	don't understand,

	"I 	do," Em said. "She wants to make him absolutely miserable 	for the rest of his life. This is how."

	This 	astounded him. i promised him a fair deal, 	this is not that.

	But 	Ette went to stand in the view of the peephole. She was ready to go.

	Cyrus 	hurried to print another message, ragna. 	this is not what i promised, she hates YOU.

	He 	felt the change. The plaque was no longer solid in his grasp. He had 	been undeleted.

	Ette 	glanced at him, satisfied. Then she walked to the shell. She walked 	through its wall and disappeared inside.

	"He 	accepted the exchange," Cyrus said. "But he had to know 	what was on her mind."

	"He 	did. But any hen is better than no hen, and she was the prettiest in 	his harem. He doesn't mind that she hates him." Her mouth 	quirked. "He's male."

	The 	bewilderment was wearing off, like his lost memory. "What about 	you, then? Your master is gone."

	"I 	remain loyal. I will supervise the supply of food, to be sure he is 	not mistreated. Go to your Princess, If she is dead, I will still be 	here. I will make you forget."

	A 	bulb flashed over his head, and this one didn't explode. "Like 	Ette! You want to make the rest of my life miserable."

	"Oh, 	yes," she agreed. "And you will agree. If your child bride 	is gone."

	Cyrus 	 rather feared he would. But there were other details to 	attend to. "Where is Kadence?"

	"I 	am here," Kadence called. "With Anona and the ants. 	There's a crisis.' '

	"A 	what?"

	"All 	this was too much for the Queen Pique Ant. She has decided to 	retire. That leaves the Hill without a queen. They don't know what 	to do."

	Cyrus 	smiled. "Fortunately, I do, Anona, take another bite of royal 	jelly. That will make you fully female, and you will be the new 	queen. You have earned it."

	Even 	from this di-stance he felt Anona's thought. Oh!

	"But 	we must revive the Princesses," Cyrus said. "So they can 	send all the ants back to their Hill." That was hardly the only 	reason. Had he diverted Ragna in time?

	"Yes," 	Kadence agreed.

	The 	two of them, and Anona riding in Kadence's hair, made their way back 	to the Nest.

	A 	woman was there, bending over the still forms of the Princesses. 	"Who are you?" Cyrus demanded.

	"I 	am Princess Ivy. their mother," the woman replied. "I 	felt my beloved children in danger, and had to come. And who are 	you?"

	Cyrus 	was shaken, and unable to respond immediately.

	"He 	is my father, Cyrus Cyborg," Kadence said. "And Princess 	Rhythm is my mother."

	Ivy 	was shocked. "Your what!"

	Kadence 	smiled disarmingly. "Hello, Grandma Ivy. We just saved Xanth 	from Ragna Roc."

	Something 	crossed Ivy's face, but it was not exactly joy. "I'll deal with 	this in a moment." She put her hands on Melody.

	In 	a stretched moment Melody's eyelids fluttered. She woke. "Mother!" 	she said tearily, "You came!"

	"Of 	course I came, dear," Ivy said, "Who else could Enhance 	you back to wellness? Now let me tend to your sister."

	Melody 	sat up and saw the others. "Mother's Sorceress talent is 	Enhancement," she said. "She can make any good quality 	better. She just Enhanced my deleted will to live."

	"You 	girls need better supervision." Ivy fussed as she put her hands 	on Harmony. "You know you had no business getting into a mess 	like this."

	"Yes, 	Mother," Melody answered with just a hint of a ghost of a 	smile. Then she looked at Kadence. "Did it work?"

	"Yes. 	Aunt Melody. Father led Ragna into the shell, and Roc Ette slammed 	the lid on, and now she's in there with him."

	"Ouch!" 	Melody said. "Poor Ragna."

	They 	laughed.

	Harmony 	was slower to revive. "This is awful," Ivy said. "I 	can barely manage her."

	"Oh, 	you used up most of your power on me," Melody said. "I'm 	sorry."

	'The 	three of you tackling a creature like that, without your father or I 	 knowing," Ivy fussed. "Whatever possessed you?"

	"We're 	naughty girls," Melody confessed. "But we're older than we 	look,"

	Finally 	Harmony revived. "Mother! You're here!"

	"Yes 	I am," Ivy said. She looked worn. "But I fear I lack the 	power to save Rhythm, You're all simply too depleted." Tears 	were running down her face.

	"But 	if you don't Enhance her, she'll sink into illusion and be lost 	forever," Melody wailed.

	"I 	know. But the three of you were struck by terrible magic. You never 	should have tackled Ragna Roc alone. We shall have to learn to 	survive without Rhythm." She was clearly grief-stricken but 	exhausted,

	"No!" 	Melody cried,

	'There 	must be something," Harmony agreed.

	There 	was no conclusion from Rhythm. She lay 	there, almost as still as death.

	Cyrus 	was devastated. "Rhythm!" he cried, gazing at the still 	form. "You can't go! I love you!" He flung himself down 	and kissed her passionately on the mouth.

	At 	first she was passive. Then she began to respond. Finally she kissed 	him back, ardently.

	As 	their kiss broke, he lifted her and held her against him. "Oh, 	Rhythm! I couldn't let you go."

	She 	smiled weakly. "Let's get married, Cyrus."

	Then 	they became aware of the others. Rhythm turned and saw her sisters 	and mother, "Hi," she said faintly.

	"You're 	a child!" Ivy said severely.

	"Mother," 	Melody said, "He revived her."

	"Mother," 	Harmony agreed, "He saved her life."

	"Mother," 	Rhythm concluded. "I'm seventeen, really, I love him."

	"And 	I'm their daughter," Kadence repeated 	proudly. "And we just saved Xanth."

	Ivy 	put her hands to her face, "I think I'm going to have a 	headache."

	Another 	man appeared. "Gnonentity Gnome," Cyrus said. "What 	are you doing in costume? The play is over,"

	"Father, 	that's not Gnonentity," Kadence said.

	Then 	he realized who it really was. "Good Magician Humfrey!"

	"Who 	else?" Humfrey asked grumpily. He turned to Ivy. "Cyrus 	was doing a Service for me. Rhythm was helping him. It was the only 	way to save Xanth from Ragna Roc. The mission 	had to be secret, because Ragna would have deleted all parties had 	he caught on. What happened between them was necessary."

	"Necessary!" 	Ivy exclaimed. "She"s a child!"

	"Necessary 	to summon Kadence from the future," Humfrey said. "She was 	essential to the effort. Without her it could not have been 	accomplished. Two to the Fifth: they were the Two, Kadence the 	fifth. Which is to say she was an idea they filled out by summoning 	her and borrowing mass to give her solidity. She can not remain 	here."

	"But 	my child can't have a child! The Adult Conspiracy forbids it!"

	"I 	made an aging spell," Rhythm said, "I was twenty-two when 	we did it,"

	"Be 	that as it may," Humfrey said. "And much as Xanth may owe 	the two of you, Cyrus and Rhythm, the old order has been salvaged. 	Cyrus must be banished to Counter Xanth for six years, to abate 	suspicion, and Kadence must return to her own time."

	"No!" 	Rhythm cried. She gathered Kadence to her, and the three of them 	stood together.

	"When 	in due course she will rejoin you, when you are of age and married, 	and can make a proper family," Humfrey continued inexorably. 	"Her job here is done."

	They 	all saw the inexorable logic of it. They knew they couldn't fight 	it.

	Humfrey 	brought out a vial. "Drink this," he told Kadence.

	The 	child took it. "Mother, Father, I love you," she said. She 	drank the fluid in the vial.

	Then, 	softly and silently, she faded away. Rhythm cried quietly into 	Cyrus's shoulder, and his own eyes were flowing.

	"Now 	you," Humfrey said, proffering another vial.

	/ 	know Counter Xanth. Rhythm 	thought rebelliously. Everything there 	is reversed, only you can select how it happens. I'll visit you and 	I won't he a child.

	Cyrus 	nodded appreciatively. Exile didn't bother him, but he would not be 	able to stand being separated from her. Humfrey was sending him to 	where their love could be legitimate, seemingly coincidentally. The 	Good Magician was on their side. He drank the vial.

	He 	found himself in an unfamiliar land. It was filled with zones where 	odd reversals happened, but he was able to step back and unreverse 	himself. That was fortunate, because one section reversed him to an 	old man instead of a young one; another to an ugly man; and another 	into a woman. He didn't want to be old or ugly or a woman. It made a 	difference how he crossed the lines; he had to do it right, or the 	reversal didn't unreverse.

	When 	he found a section that rendered him into a two-year-old child, he 	pondered as he backed out. Two was his 	technical age. What would it do to a twelve-year-old child?

	He 	found a way to get behind that section without being childified. and 	made a camp there. Then he waited.

	Soon 	Rhythm appeared, evidently having conjured herself there. "You 	found it!" she exclaimed, pleased. Then she strode forward, and 	when she reached him she was a full adult.

	She 	hugged him and kissed him and squirmed rapidly out of her clothes. 	"All you want is one thing, right?" she asked without 	giving him a chance to demur. "Over and over." She took 	him through it. over and over.

	But 	meanwhile she talked, catching him up on events back in Xanth. "We 	took the ants back to their Hill, and Anona is Queen. She really 	likes it, but she doesn't have a Consort. She sort of likes you—"

	"What?"

	"But 	I told her you were taken," she said teasingly. "They're 	finding new homes for all the former Minions of Ragna Roc. He 	thought the final battle would destroy everything, but all it 	destroyed was his Rock Candy Castle. They're working on recovering 	the deleted folk of Pompos City, starting with Layea. And they're 	working on the dragonflies, for Andromeda, You liked her, didn't 	you?"

	"Rhythm—"

	She 	giggled. She had been teasing him again. The child Rhythm had never 	been much of a tease; this adult version was. In fact she was adult 	in a different way, not merely an aged child. Her personality had 	filled out, enhancing aspects that were only hinted at in the child. 	The discovery of this more mature yet still playful woman promised 	to be rewarding.

	"And 	Em Pathy," she continued. "She's sort of sweet on you. 	Maybe we should send her here."

	"Maybe 	you should," he agreed, trying to play her game.

	She 	ignored it. "The troupe isn't disbanding. Just about all the 	members want to stay with it. Piper and Don are already scouting for 	new locations for presentations, Curtis and Crabapple are running 	it, and they will develop new plays and put them on."

	"New 	plays?"

	"If 	you write them, I'll deliver them. You should have time to write. 	Melete's still with you, isn't she?"

	"Yes, 	of course," Melete agreed. "Where would he be, without 	me?"

	"Nowhere," 	Cyrus said sincerely.

	"And 	in six years, when I'm eighteen." Rhythm continued, "you'll 	return to Xanth and marry me. Then we'll see about getting Kadence 	back, and she won't suddenly jump to age six, either. Do you think 	she'll remember?"

	"We'll 	tell her."

	"Yes 	we will. We couldn't have saved Xanth without her." She paused, 	then thought of something else. "Do you know the best part of 	all this?"

	"Loving 	you," he answered promptly.

	"That, 	too. I mean, both my sisters are jealous."

	He 	laughed. "Are you sure you're adult?"

	"At 	the moment. But when I'm a child, that's really fun. And there's 	another thing."

	"What 	would that be?" he asked warily.

	"I 	remember."

	Oops. 	"You mean—what we do? But you're a child! You're not 	supposed to—"

	He 	stopped, because she was bursting out with laughter. She was teasing 	him again.

	Taken 	as a whole, this promised to be a bearable exile.





	Author's Note


	On 	Mayhem 3, 2006 (I use the Ogre Months), I made my first notes on 	this novel. Two to the Fifth, the 	thirty-second in the Xanth series. I pondered the relevance of the 	title to a fantasy novel, and realized that the Fifth could be the 	fifth dimension, which I have always regarded as mass, I checked the 	reader suggestion list and saw Kadence, Princess Rhythm's daughter, 	with a useful talent. So I had a start on the novel. But there was a 	problem: Kadence did not yet exist, and her mother Rhythm was at 	this stage only twelve years old. That required some pondering. How 	could she be brought into existence in time for this story? The 	answer batters the nefarious Adult Conspiracy almost beyond 	recognition and gives naughtiness a bad name, as remarked in the 	novel.

	Next 	day my computer crashed. That generated a distraction of several 	months, because naturally I had not backed up certain key files. 	It's always the files you never think to back up that turn out to be 	the most important when they are lost. I use Linux, an open-source 	operating system that can be properly understood only by elusive 	Mundanian magicians called geeks. I had lost the geek who set up my 	system, so was in trouble. There are a number of Linux 	distributions, all of which are fundamentally similar but different 	in detail. All of them claim to be easy for anyone to install. None 	of them are. We struggled with several, some of which installed 	imperfectly, demanding nonexistent passwords, graying out essential 	dialogue boxes, and pulling other annoying stunts. Others refused to 	touch my system at all. We would put in 	the disk and 	tell it to 	install, and the disk would reset the 	system, start 	over, and reset the 	system again, indefinitely. We're not 	geeks, and obviously Linux was not about to let us have it 	geeklessly. We did get Xandros, but it started trashing my files. I 	tried SUSE, but didn't like its 	environment. They all had trouble 	addressing backup discs and the 	Internet. Thus went the dull month of 	Jejune.

	We 	had to buy a new system and juggle things around, before finding a 	hardware combination that would allow one distribution, Linspire, to 	install and work well enough. It wasn't 	perfect, and I 	couldn't get it to go online at all, but 	at least it was close enough to use. 	(Linspire lives online, but I live in the backwoods and have only 	dial-up, which it mostly ignores. So I had only a fraction of what 	it offers others.) So in the months of Jewel-lye,

	Awghost, 	and SapTimber I used Linspire to write this novel. After this I'll 	try Kubuntu to see if I like it better. The point is, I worked out 	the bypaths of the novel while struggling with the bypaths of Linux.

	At 	this writing I am seventy-two years old, with a bad back (a 	collapsed disk—could that be why my computer had trouble 	addressing discs?) and my wife is struggling with her health. Age is 	a bleep. Those who want to track my ongoing activities can click my 	website, www,hipiers.com. Every so often a fan asks if he can take 	over the writing of Xanth novels after I croak, and I politely 	decline. As Mark Twain said, reports of my death are exaggerated. 	Also at this writing there are three movies based on my books being 	worked on; by the time of publication more may be known about that.

	Once 	again I used more than a hundred reader suggestions, but more kept 	piling in. Some readers sent pages of puns, too many to use in one 	novel. I considered having special regions made up of all these 	puns, but feared that would slow the story. So I used a few, and 	saved the rest for future novels. I try to use puns by everyone else 	before using several by one person, as a matter of fairness. Some 	notions were simply too good to use in the late stages of this 	novel; I'm saving them for better treatment in the next. I hate to 	use a good idea as a peripheral mention, when it could be so much 	more. Some relate to characters that don't appear here, so again 	they have to wait. But in a general way, I used up the available 	ideas through July 2006. It's likely to be two years before they see 	publication, but at least they are in the pipeline.

	About 	character names: some I invent, often with alliteration, like Cyrus 	Cyborg or Don Donkey. Some are suggested by readers. And some I 	borrow from readers, generally without their knowledge. Some readers 	write me asking that they be put into Xanth; the answer is generally 	no. But when I need a spot name for someone with a particular 	talent, then I may use the suggester's name. It is pretty much 	chance, so don't deluge me with talents, hoping to get your name 	used as a character; you're likely to be disappointed.

	Here 	are the credits, in general order of use, but when a person has more 	than one, I list them together.

	Novel 	Title: Two to the Fifth, for 	the thirty-second Xanth novel. Assorted Cans, Em Pathy—Tim 	Bruening. Golden Retriever, grape and strawberry jellyfish, shedding 	mortal coils. Rhythm's chicken-leg drumsticks. Deathbed—Robert. 	Piper as a significant character—Piper Misna. Dust Devil that 	is really a devil—Chase Kelly. Selective Friction—Trevor 	Brogan. Tess Tosterone, S Trojan—David Witchell. Like-ens and 	Dislike-ens—Amethyst Steven Robot, Synthe, and Roman 	tics—Scott Wheeler. T-Tree with hot cups of tea—Mary 	Rashford, Xina—Ken Kirschenman. Flying Turtle Dove, Bed 	Rock, Sea Urchin—Alex Paris. Knuckle

	Sandwich— 	Niku Larang, Tuff, the volcanic rock salesman—Carlos 	Plascencia. Strip Tide, Feather Boa Constrictor, Gray V, Mugs that 	steal—Kelsie O'Dea. Serendipity Serpent, White and Yellow 	Pages—^Judi Trainer. Gene Pool—David Seltzer. A Void 	Dance—Norman McLeod. Beaten Path—Cassi. Ants: Defend, 	Correspond, Persist, Convers, Inf, Antiperspir, Adjudic, Ex-pector, 	Miscre, Disinfect, Mendic, Contest, Merch, Eleph, Inform. Flagr, 	Claim, Consult—Donna Macomber-Cassidy. Adverbi, Bronchi 	Ale—Jennifer Katz. Ragna Roc—Steven Zimmerman. Magnet 	Monster vs. Com Pewter—Evelynn Moore, Navel Oranges—Shannon 	Amey. Talent of making mirrors appear—Johnny Maio. Excerpting 	letters from words to make magic, boy and girl who read minds of 	women and men—Megan Higgins. Lady Bug—Christina Pimie. 	Umber Ella, Copies of Roland's program make other robots barbarian, 	and loving Hannah—Mark O. Burson. Candy Striper—David J. 	Browlee. Weslee Weredragon—Weslee Scott. Eye Sickle—Tom 	Marrin. Walk in someone else's shoes, use their magic—Tom 	Koerber. Talent of the Silver Lining—Christa. Wood Bees—Ethan 	Suntag. Causeway, for a good cause—Daniel Forbes. Scowling 	Powder—Susan Lepper. Butter Fingers—Dale Ashbum. Algae 	Bra—Hercilla A. Dillard. Daylight Saving Hours—Rachel 	Vater Kadence—Maura Guerrero. Guise, making special clothing; 	Layea, who makes any male do her bidding, 23 minutes of 24 hours; 	Gole, able to make reversed copies of people; talent of rearranging 	one's body; Masque that imbues one ability of creature it's made 	from—Joseph Raymer, Talent of organization: coordinating 	others efficiently—Mary Eriksen. Talent of making food—Jim 	Egerton. Magic Drinks: Ales, Gins, Rums, etc.—Avi Omstein. 	Telephone—Andrew Palmer. Iron E, Gold N—Andrea Duquette. 	Lettered salts. Talent of changing one thing in a person's memory. 	Talent of making small rocks explode—Joseph Laurendeau. 	Mermaids, merbutlers, memannies—Carlos Plascencia. Object of 	D's Ire—Frederick Love and Aunt Dee Dee. Talent Scout—Jen 	Bartlett. Talent of controlling a wisp of fog—Tommy Yarbrough. 	Talent of conjuring assorted cloths, or of turning cloth as hard as 	steel—Blackadder, Talent of being perfect on the first try, 	not thereafter—Donna Duffy, Ability to invoke the talents of 	dead people, talent of making stone invisible—Alex Aylor, 	Twins In Crease and De Crease—Jessica Becker. Talent of 	unbreaking—Pete. Water moccasins—Norm McLead. Water 	dragon made of water—Dale DellaTorre. Talent of creating a 	local Region of Madness—John Frey. Disastrous Misses—Blaine 	Conner. Coughee—R. J, Craigs. Talent of the Seldom 	Scene—Shaunna Gyorki. D Kay, zombie demoness—Norm 	McLeod. Zombies lend a hand, never give lip, go to pieces—Kiti 	Williams, Cities of Necess, Adver, Pompos, Elasti, and Verbo—Melanie 	Nunnelee, Hell Breaking Loose, basis for the play "The 	Riddle"—Daniel Colpi. Andromeda, queen of 	dragonflies—Ashley Williford, Orienta, who conjures Eastern 	things—Carrie Foster. Names: Damien, Demetrius, Lita, 	Nathaniel, Katriana—Sharina Van Dom, Lullaby, who sings folk 	to sleep—^Jessica Becker. Block Long Erection—George 	Steele. Common Cents—Jill King, Escape Peas—David 	Witchell, Talent of knocking the socks off 	people—Dale Ashbum. Hydraponics—growing hydras from 	water—Lizzy Wilford. Knight Light—Niko Laranang. Fans 	Club—Norm McLeod. Obvious and Obvious Lee—Patricia 	Blalock. Talent of can't be hurt by mundane means—K. Adams,

	So 	what is the future of Xanth? Well, I'm working on completing the 	letters of the alphabet for the titles. The next one is probably 	Xanth number thirty-three. Jumper 	Cable, featuring a descendant of 	Jumper Spider, who appeared in Xanth number three. Castle 	Roogna, He is marvelously adept with 	spun silk cables, and Com Pewter needs one for a key connection. But 	we'll see.





